======================================================================
UNIT I - EDUCATION IN CONTEMPORARY INDIA
Content: Education Meaning Functions Types, Levels of Education, Indian Constitutional Values
Pages: 6 - 52
======================================================================


──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 6
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 6
a

e666 G

yuu

——)

CONTENTS
— COGN TENS
Unit Lesson , Topic Page
sm
7:01 Meaning of Equality in Education 255
7:02 Equality in Constitutional Provisions 256
7:03 Causes for Inequality in Education 259
7:04 Ways and Means to Provide Equal
Opportunity in Edudcation 262
7:04:1 Position of Equality in Educational

Opportunities in.Tamil Nadu ~ 270

7:05 Inequality and the causes for. it 273
7:06 Social Inequality 274
7:06:1 Meaning and Definition of ‘Social Inequality’ 274
: Causes for Social Inequality . 275
Meaning of ‘Inequality in Education’ 281

Causes for ‘Inequality in Education’ 281
Discriminating Social Groups 282
Marginalisation of Social Groups 284

Concept of Marginalisation 284
Marginalized Children and Their Characteristics 285

nequality 287

Caste-based Social Inequality 288
Gender-based Inequality 290
Class-based Inequalities 292

Inequality Related to Regions 294

Education to Eliminate Social Inequalities 297

Education for the Marginalized Groups 301

Meaning of ‘Marginalized Social Group’ 302
Characteristics of Marginalized Social Groups 303
Marginalized People in India - 304

11: Education of the Dalits : 305
7:11:4:01 Educational Facilities Provided to the Dalits 305
7:41:55 Education of Scheduled Tribes 306
7:11:5:01 Problems in the Education of the Tribals 307

7:11:5:02 Ways and Means of Providing Education :
for the Scheduled Tribes -° .: 308

7:11:6 Education of Women 309
7:11:6:01 Measures for Improving Women’s Education 309

, Conclusion ‘ie © 311
Review Questions / 312

UNIT -I

EDUCATION IN CONTEMPORARY INDIA
AND CONSTITUTIONAL CONTEXT

Content of this Unit:

This Unit consists of three lessons. Lesson 1
titled “Education: Meaning, Functions and Types”
deals with the meaning and definition of “Education”,

its. nature, functions and aims, nature of education

as a separate discipline and the types of education.
Lesson 2 with the title ‘Levels of Education” delves
into the various levels of education such as pre-
primary education, primary education, secondary
education, higher secondary education, higher
education, professional education, distance
education and open school system. Lesson 3 with

‘the title “Indian Constitutional Values and

Education” discusses about the educational aims
and Constitution, fundamental rights and duties of
citizens as envisaged in the Constitution, emergence
of Right to Education Act, the contents and the salient
features of it, the circumstances leading to the
inclusion of education in the concurrent list and its
implications.

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 7
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 7
LESSON - 1

Education: Meaning, Functions
and Types

1:00 Introduction

This lesson attempts to explain briefly the
concept of education, definitions of education,
various aims of education, our national aims of
education, functions of education and three types of

education - formal, non-formal and informal
education.

1:01 Concept of Education

Etymologically, the term ‘Education’ is traced to
different sources of derivation. According to oneview,
‘Education’ originated from the Latin word ‘educare’
which means ‘to bring up’ or ‘ to nourish’. This implies
that the child is to be brought.up according to certain
aims and ends in view. There is another derivation
from the Latin word ‘educere’ which means“ to lead
out’ or ‘to draw out’ —‘e’ means ‘out’ and ‘ducere’
means ‘to lead’. According to this view the main aim
of education is ‘to draw out’ rather than ‘put in’. The
third view point tells us that the term ‘education’ is
derived from the Latin word ‘educatum’ which means

‘It is in

Education: Meaning, Functions and Types 3

“the act of teaching or training’. Thu

s we can see

g to Latin words ‘educare’ and

that accordin |
atum on is something external which

‘educatum’, educati .
is imposed from outside. But according to the Latin

word ‘educere’, education means growth from within.
this latter sense that most of the modern
educationists use and imply the term ‘education’
these days.

1:02 Indispensability of Education

Man is a social animal. His superior intelligence
differentiates him from other living beings. Other
creatures could only be trained; but man alone be
educated. Among God’s creations, man alone is
unique and noted for his intelligence and
inquisitiveness to investigate everything around him.
Man has acquired through education the capability

“to control and modify his environment, to suit his

purpose.

‘However at the time of birth, the human child is
highly helpless and dependent on others. By
education the child acquires knowledge, skills,
-healthy habits and other virtues to become a
complete man. By learning and adopting the norms
of the society in which he lives, he becomes an
efficient citizen. As he is:endowed with superior

cl-2

é

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 8
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 8
4 Contemporary India and Education

es

intelligence and capacity for learning, he could learn
fast anything and everything. He is curious to know
new ideas and facts, new ways of doing things so as
to make his life more comfortable and enjoyable.

Man’s childhaod, which is pretty. long is a
blessing in disguise, in thé sense that he could learn
the vocational skills required for his livelihood, get
adopted to the culture of his social group, develop
his inherent potentials and acquire the knowledge
about his environment. As T. Raymonds puts it,
“Education is a process to develop the potentials of
man so as to differentiate him from other living
beings.” Through education, he gets better
adjustment in behaviour with his physical, social and
spiritual environment. The core of the educative
process consists of those activities that attempt to
make_him a full man. But for education, man would
have still remained an uncultured beast. As Aristotle
puts it, “Just as living beings are superior to inanimate
things, the educated is more valuable than the
uneducated.” Through education only, man qualifies
himself, to be the noblest of all the creations of God.

1:03 Definitions of Education

Education being a most important social activity,
its meanings have been changing: through the.ages

|
{
|
|

Education: Meaning, Functions and Types S

ee
due to changes in social and physical conditions as
well as philosophical outlook of people towards life.
Different educationists, therefore, interpreted it
differently, at different times. Some of the most
popular definitions, given by our ancient educational
thinkers are given below: , °

1) Vivekananda: “Education is the manifestation
of divine perfection, already existing in man”.
According to him “The aim of all education, all
training, should be man-making.... We want that
education by which character is formed, strength of
mind is increased, the intellect is expounded and by
which one can stand on one’s own feet”. What we
require is — “life-building, man-making and character-
making education”.

2) Tagore: “Education means enabling the mind
to find out that ultimate truth which emancipates us
from the bondage of the lust and gives us the wealth,

_ not of things but of inner light, not power but of love,

making. this truth of its own and living expression to
it”.

3) Aurobindo Ghosh: “Education is helping the
growing soul to draw out that is in itself".

4) Mahatma Gandhi: “Education is the all-round

a

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 9
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 9
6 Contemporary India and Education

drawing out of the best in child and man — body, mind’

and spirit”.

Thus Indian view of education is essentially
Spiritual and intellectual in character.

Definitions encompassing the Western concept
of education are given below:

Aristotle: “Education is the creation of sound
mind in a sound body. It develops man’s faculty,
especially his mind so that he may be able to enjoy
the contemplation of supreme truth, goodness and

beauty of which perfect happiness essentially
consists”.

Pestalozzi: “Education is natural, harmonious

and pragressive development of man’s innate
powers”.

Adams: “Education isa conscious and deliberate
process in which one personality acts upon another
in order to modify the development of the other by
communication and manipulation of knowledge”.

T.P.Nunn: “Education is the complete
development of individuality of the child so that he
can make an original contribution to human life
according to the best of his capacity”.

Education: Meaning, Functions and Types 7
Ross: “The main aim of education is the

development of valuable personality and spiritual

individuality.
d be seen that most of Western
ucation as development and

Thus it coul
educationists view ed
growth of endowed innate potentials.

The most comprehensive and acceptable
definition of the, term ‘education’ has been advanced
by Redden. He says,

“Education is the deliberate and systematic
influence, exerted by the mature person upon
the immature, through instruction, discipline
and harmonious development of physical,
intellectual, aesthetic, social and spiritual powers
of human being, according to individual and
social needs and directed towards the union of
the educand with his creator as the final end”.

4:04. Nature / Characteristics of
Education

_ Asis the meaning of education, so is its nature.
It is very complex. Let us discuss the nature of
education.

1. Education is a Life-long Process
Education is a process that takes place in human

a

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 10
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 10
8 Contemporary India and Education

ee TT Ee
itfe from womb to tomb; all those which make
I . .
nfluence on human personality fall under learning.

2. Education is a Systematic Process

This means that educational activities are

transacted through systematic institutions and
regulations. :

3. Education isa Development of Individual and
the Society

Education is called _a force for social
development, which brings improvement in every
aspect in the society.

4. Education is Modification of Behaviour

Human behavior is modified and improved
through the educational process.

5. Education is Purposive

Every individual has some goal in his life;
education contributes in the attainment of that goal.
There is a definite purpose underlined in all
educational activities.

6. Education is a Training too

Human senses, mind, behviour, activities and
skills are trained in a constructive’ and socially
desirable way. co

Education: Meaning, Functions and Types 9

7. Education involves Instruction and Direction.

Education directs and instructs an individual to
fulfill his desires and needs for exaltation of his
whole personality.

8. Education is Life

Life without education is meaningless like the
life of a beast. Life experiences are educative in one
aspect or othér.

9. Education is Continuous Reconstruction of

Experiences

As per the definition of education by John
Dewey, education reconstructs and remodels our
experiences towards socially desirable way.

10. Education helps in Individual Adjustment

Man is a social being. If he is not able to adjust
himself in different aspects of life; his personality
can not remain balanced. Through the medium
of education he learns to adjust himself with

friends, classmates, ‘parents, relatives,

‘neighbours, teachers etc.

11. Education as Balanced Development

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 11
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 11
10

Contemporary India and Education

12. Education is a Dynamic Process

It develops the child according to the changing
situations and times.

13. Education is a Bipolar Process

According to. Adams, ‘Education is a
conscious and deliberate process in which one
personality acts upon another in order to modify.

the development of the other by communication
and manipulation of knowledge.

14. Education is a three Dimensional Process

As John Dewey points Out, process of
education consists of three poles — the teacher,
the child And the society.

15. Education as Growth

The end of growth is more growth and the end
of education is more education. Thus education
is to produce continuous growth in people, both
physical and psychological.

1:05 Aims of Education

Aims of education serve as the basis for all the
elements involved in the educative process.

Educational aims indicate the goals to which all our.

educational programmes are to be geared to. The

12.
Education: Meaning, Functions and Types
eved ina short period of time

i re to be achi .
aims thata here are mainly two

are termed as ‘objectives’. T
types of aims :’

4. General Aims, 2. Specific Aims.

General aims of education are those which apply
to the whole of mankind. Specific
elative to the conditions
change with the

in their generality
aims of education are r
available at a particular time. They
changing needs.

General aims may be classified as Lala
and ‘Social’ aims of education. Specific aims of
education are : (i) Knowledge aim (ii) Vocational
aim (iii) Moral aim (iv) Complete living; aim
(v) Harmonious development of personality aim
(vi) Aim for spending the leisure time usefully etc.

Aims of Education

re

General Aims

[——4

Social Aims

Specific Aims

Individual Aims

1. Knowledge 2. Vocational 3.Moral 4. The Complete 5. Harmonius 6. Leisure
Aim Aim Aim Living Aim Development Aim

. of Personality
1. Individual Aim

Educational thinkers like Sir Percy Nunn

\
i f
\
|

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 12
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 12
12 Contemporary Indla and Education

Pee
advocate that the chief aim of education is the
unfoldment of individual personality.. The progress
of great nations is because of individuals. Hence
individuality must be given full opportunity for
fulfillment. Adams also states that education is the
endeavour to help”one for self-realisation.

Education is the training given for individuals so
as to develop the characteristic potentials inherent
in each one of them. All can not be moulded in the
same cast and such type of uniform education for
all, is useless and futile.

Development of individuality is based on
freedom. Freedom is not the licence for uncontrolled
and unruly behaviour. It denotes the functioning
within certain parameters, having no clash with
others’ freedom. Students should know their
responsibilities too, along with their freedom.

Social institutions like the church, the school and
the state exist only for bettering and improving the
life of the individual. Without individual there can not
be any society. Students of today are the citizens of
tommorow. Therefore all educational efforts should
bring into focus the individual and ‘not the society.

nee

Education: Meaning, Functions and Types 12

2. Social Aim

Educationists like Prof. Bagley and John Dewey
advocate that aim of education is to produce socially’
efficient individuals. The individuals should learn to
subordinate their ends for the sake of broader ends
of the society. This aim of education is also referred
to as ‘citizenship aim’ by some educationists.

An individual has no existence apart from society.
A human child requires a social medium for its
development. A socially efficient citizen is one who
learns the norms of the society and adapt his
behaviour accordingly, gets trained in a vocation so

‘as to earn his livelihood and fulfill his self-needs. He
‘will be able to contribute to the society as much as

he can. The goals of social aims of education are :
' i) good health and vitality

ii) vocational efficiency -

iii) simple skills required for a good life

iv) cooperation with other members of the family

v) good parenthood

vi) good citizenship

vii) spending usefully one’s leisure-time

Though individual and social aims of education

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 13
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 13
14 Contemporary India and Education oo
WT,
seem to be antagonistic to each other, really they
are Complementary to one another. As Ross says
“Individuality is of no value and Personality is a
meaningless term apart from the social environment
in which they are developed and made to manifest.
Self-realization can be achieved only through social
service, and social ideals or real values can come
into being Only through free individuals who have

developed valuable individuality. The circle cannot
be broken.” 7

3. Knowledge Aim

Knowledge aim of education gives more
emphasis for the Cognitive development of human
personality. It is knowledge that makes a man
resourceful and hence acquisition of knowledge
about the world we live in is basic to all educational
programmes. It is believed that knowledge sharpens
our mind and empowers it to investigate anything
and everything. It is the key which unlocks human
power and happiness. Knowledge removes
ignorance, dust and darkness and leads an individual
to success. It is due to knowledge that man could
advance much and bring glories, discoveries and
inventions to his credit.

re

: . u
4 tion: Meaning, Functions and Type:
Educa i

a ee

‘4. Vocational Aim

Some educationists think that education mus

enable the child to take up some vocation in eee
rn his livelihood. They contend that a person whc

ea .

is unable to make his living, is a drag on the society

Education, should concentrate more on developing
the hands of the individual into productive arms than
on cultivating.the head and the heart. Vocational aim

flourishes in a country which is hoelonsh alee

5. Moral Aim

According to Herbart, “Formation of character
should be regarded as the highest aim and the
teachers should develop strength of will and purity
of character.” Education consists in the conquest of
the lower impulses by high ideals. Morality consists
of purity of thought, word’and deed. As Dr.S.
Radhakrishnan, our former President, has put it,
“Education is not merely a means to earning a living,
nor is it only a nursery of thought or a school of
citizenship. It is initiation into a life of spirit, a training
of human souls in the pursuit of truth and the practice
-of virtue. It is a second birth, ‘dvittiya janma”.
6. The Complete, Living Aim

. Herbart Spencer is the sponsor of this aim.
According to him, education should enable us to treat

é

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 14
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 14
16 Contemporary India and Education
eee
the body, mind and soul in the right manner.
Education should teach us to enjoy life, to spend
our leisure profitably and to behave as good citizens.
Such standards of living, make us know when our
life is complete; John Dewey says that instead of
imparting knowledge to’ pupils, we should develop
the ability to solve problems encountered in life.

7. Harmonius Development of Personality

By harmonious development we mean the
development of all Powers and capacities of an
individual - physical, intellectual, emotional, moral,
aesthetic, social and spiritual. It is not desirable
to develop one power of an individual at the cost
of his other capacities and potentials. We do not
require lop-sided personalities. Mere. athletes,
sportsmen, engineers and scientists are lop-sided
types and can not lead successful life.

Itis also not possible to develop all the potentials
of an individual equally. The word ‘'harmonius
development’ simply means giving equal importance
for all potentials to develop so that each one develop
according to his own characteristics. Harmonious
development aim in education: requires the
development of all inherent potentials. in individuals

to blossom fully.

Education: Meaning, Functions and Types L7

aa

8. Leisure Aim

‘Education should help a person to spend his
leisure time usefully. Leisure time is neither to be
spent idlely nor for recreation only. It should be spent
in such a way that it is profitable both for the ‘self’
and to the society in large. A person who does not
know how to spend his free time, could be labelled
as an intellectual beast.

The above discussed educational aims are all
unique, each in its own way. Educational aims get
prescribed according to the place, time, sacietal and
individual needs. As Horne points out “no single
educational aim could be identified as the best. That
educational system which gives equal importance for
and integrates all aims of education is undoubtedly

the best.”
1:05:1 National Objectives of Education in
India

Indian Education Commission headed by
Dr.D.C. Kothari, in its report (1966) has pointed out
the following as our national objectives :

i) Relating education to productivity

ii) Strengthening social and national integration

iii) Consolidating democracy as a form of

Pi

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 15
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 15
18 Contemporary India and Education

eSSSsseSeeseseesesFseseFe

government and helping the country to adopt
it as a way of life.

iv) Accelarating the process of modernisation.

Vv) Building character by cultivating social, moral
and spiritual values.

1:06 Functions of Education
Education is essential to the individual as well
as to the society. Education helps one to understand

him completely and to achieve his goals. The
functions of education are:

Towards Individual

Education helps in strengthening the
personality of an individual.

- Education promotes ethical behaviour.

- Education transforms a person and makes him
more balanced and calm.

- An educated person has broader perspective
towards life.

- Education truly improves.the future of an
individual.

- Education improves reasoning and thinking
power.

19
Functions and Types

——

Education: Meaning,

A Eee

the
Education teaches a person to preserve

natural environment.

Towards Society

d traditional customs.

i r
Education is the reason behind the faste
development of science and technology-
of system that

Removal of unwante

Education helps in development
maintains ecological balance. It discourages
unnecessary wastage and helps in maintaining
equality between the supply and demand.

Education promotes equality and wellness.
Education helps individual to fight for their right
and eradicate inequality and poverty.
Education fights prejudice and hatred anc
promotes a friendlier atmosphere and teaches
us to give equal opportunity and respect to all
caste, religion, creed etc. -

Towards Nation

cl-3

Education makes people aware about their
rights as citizens of a country. It helps people
to fight for! their right, and eradicate unfail
practices. Education helps in achieving
freedom by making people to aware of thei!
duties and rights as citizens of country.

g &

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 16
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 16
2
0 Contemporary India and Education
a
~  Educati in tt
| on helps in the development of
eadership quality inside a person. It helps in
the inner growth of a person which makes him
active and socially, politically, and religiously
4 responsible citizen.

~ It helps to eradicate dictatorship and trains

people for democracy.

- Education has truly helped in development of
the anni International transaction,
globalization ete. all are the gifts of education.

1:07 Nature of Education as a
Separate Discipline

1:07:1. Definition of ‘Academic
Discipline’ 4

The data, information and knowledge collected
and accumulated by human race are classified into
several branches. Each one of these branches is a
liscipline or field of study. Each discipline has got
ts own unique field of research, methods of research
ind subject contents. These are known as important
ements of a discipline.

The stock of knowledge _ in any academic
iscipline is classified and arranged in the form of
oncepts, principles and theories so as to give it a

Education: Meaning, Functions and Types 21

distinct theoretical structure. A part from this, every
discipline has its specific origin or long history.

Only those who have experience and proficiency
in a particular discipline are known as experts in that
discipline The scope of a discipline’ gets expanded
through the researches of the experts in that -
discipline.

1:07:2 Nature of Education as a
Distinct Discipline

Following characteristics of education signify

education as a distinct discipline:

1. Theoretical Structure’ :
‘Pedagogy’ or teaching forms the core of
knawledge, constituting the academic discipline
education and the concepts , principles and theories
related to pedagogy are arranged properly and inter-
linked so as to give it a distinct theoretical structure.
‘Researches undertaken continuously in this field
bring changes now and then in this structure of
knowledge.
2. Process of Education

Education is the process of modifying the
knowledge and skills of students so as to effect

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 17
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 17
22 Contemporary India and Education
ey
improvements. When teaching is undertaken based
on the set aims and objectives, changes in students’
behavior occur. Therefore the process of education
i.e. teaching is the distinct process of the academic
discipline education.

3. Education as a System

Education as a distinct system has its own input
(Students), process (teaching methods) and output
(the progress or improvement noticed in students).
So education is a discipline.

4. Education has its own Field of Research and
Laboratory

Educational institutions and their classrooms
serve as the laboratories for conducting educational
research. Various educational researches are
conducted across the different parts of the world,
regarding what kind of classroom climate, methods
of teaching, evaluative techniques, methods of
providing feedback etc., enhance students’
performance and proficiency in learning .

5. Education has its own Research Method

The research methods of education are unique
in nature. Various research methods adopted by

Education: Meaning, Functions and Types 23

TO
researchers like ‘Historical Method’, ‘Survey, Method’,
‘Case Study’, ‘Experimental Method’, ‘Genetic Study’, -
‘Causal Comparative Method’, ‘Correlational
Method’, etc., Methods of forming hypotheses,
Sampling techniques undertaken, Analysis and
interpretation of the collected data, ’Drawing
conclusions, the errors (Type | and Type II) that may
creep in and the methods of avoiding-them, are
unique for educational research.

Thus education as a process and research
method, has its own self code of conduct which
makes it a distinct academic discipline.

1:08 Types of Education
1:08:1 Formal Education

This system of education has.a fixed curriculum,
appointed teachers, specified premises for
functioning, scheduled time of work, admission
procedures, examination system, certification etc.
Schools, Colleges, Universities, Training Institutes
‘impart formal education. :

1:08:2 Non- Formal Education

This system of education is Open one with regard
to admissions, curricula, place of instruction, mode
of instruction, the time and duration of instruction.

ri

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 18
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 18
we wowwr’

7

\

24 Contemporary India and Education

Examples of such system are: Education and training
given by voluntary organisations for adult populations
(e.g. adult education, carpet-making, toy-making
etc.), for women (e.g. tailoring, knitting, basket
weaving etc.), for Mahila Mandals, for youth
organisations, ete-In a sense, open university system
can also be considered as non-formal. -
1:08:3
Informal education is incidental education
achieved through conversation, contact and in a non-
designed situation. It is spontaneous rather than
deliberate. Informal agencies of education include
the family, the society, the play groups, professional
organisations, youth-activity groups and the like.

Informal Education

Conclusion

Meaning and definitions of education,
indispensability of education, various aims of
education, national objectives of Indian education,
functions of education and three types of education
viz. formal, non-formal and informal education were
discussed in detail in this lesson.

Education: Meaning, Functions and Types 25

oe
Review Questions:
1. What is the concept of Education? (C)
[Ans: 1:01]
2. Define ‘Education’ (C) [Ans: In 1:03 Adam’s or
Redden's definition]
3. State the importance of Education to man. (B)
[Ans:1 :02]
4. Briefly explain the nature of education. (C)
[Ans: 1:04]
5. Explain briefly the various aims of Education.
(B) [Ans:.1:05]
6. Briefly-explain the functions of education. (B)
[Ans: 1:06]
7. Write a short. note on each of the following:
(i) Formal Education (C) [Ans: 1:08:1]
(ii) Non-formal Education (@) [Ans: 1:08:2]
(iii) Informal Education (C) [Ans: 1:08:3]
8.. Define ‘Academic Discipline’. (C)-[Ans: 1:07:1]

9. Explain the nature of Education as a separate
discipline. (B) [Ans: 1:07:2]

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 19
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 19
LESSON — 2
LEVELS OF EDUCATION

2:00 Introduction

In this lesson , Various levels of education such
as pre-primary education, Primary education,
secondary education, higher secondary education,
higher education, professional education, distance
‘education and open education and their respective
objectives are to be discussed elaborately.

2:01 Various Levels of Education

From the very beginning of human race,
‘teaching’ and ‘learning’ continue to be practised in
all societies in some way or other. Initially the family
served as the agency of education. As the societies
grew larger and complex with the growth of civilization
and as human knowledge and experiences became
accumulated, home or family was found inadequate
to impart education. Thus was born the formal
agency of education called ‘school’ and people
trained in the teaching-learning process were
appointed as teachers. The first revolution in the

‘history of education occurred when the task of

Levels of Education 2)

——S—S—-~.-—n_—T—
educating the young was shifted, from parents to
teachers and from home to school. In this system of
formal education too, changes took place with the
passage of time in aims, structure and activities;
These changes are still continuing.

In formal school education there are five levels.

i) Pre-primary School Level (age 3 to 5),
ii). Primary School Level (age 5-to 11),
iii) Middle School Level (age. 11 to 14),
iv) Secondary Level (age 14 to 16),
v) Senor/Higher Secondary Level (age 16 to 18),

Apart from these educational. levels, the other
levels of education are :

vi) Professional education (for those who passed
the higher secondary course),

vii) Distance education ( those who: want to pursue

' higher education after completing higher

secondary course; no need for formally
attending educational institutions.),

viii) Open education (Facilitates to pursue any
level of education by any student of age 16 arty
above and laving no minimum formal educational
qualificatio y from the comfort of his/her home

é

a ar daw a LY

me ae

a

#

4
M]

be

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 20
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 20
28 Contemporary India and|Education

|
according to his/her convenience). The

objectives of each of these levels are briefly
discussed in the following sections.

2:02- = Pre-primary or Nursery Level
Education and its Objectives

2:0231 Meaning of Pre-primary
Education

Pre-primary education refers to the educational
preparation of the child or the desirable learning
experiences provided before the child starts going
to a regular school. In India pre-primary education
is provided for children between the ages 212 and 5
years. This period in life is highly formative. The
impressions and sensations which the little one starts
acquiring leave indelible marks and get internalised
in the child’s system. Hence pre-primary education
aims to promote physical health in children,
provide sufficient opportunities to develop
desirable social traits and intellectual abilities
and fulfill the various psychological, social and
emotional needs. No formal teaching is attempted
at the pre-primary level; instead a well planned
stimulating atmosphere is created through a series
of programmes in which young kids joyfully

Levels of Education 29

nnn,

participate and develop their physical, intellectual and
social skills.

Pre-primary schools, providing for pre-school
education are variously known as ‘Nursery Schools’
‘Kindergarten’, ‘ Montessori schools’ etc. Pre-

primary education has not yet become compulsory

in ‘any of the countries of the world. /

2:02:2 Importance of Pre-primary

Education

Though Pre-primary education is not

compulsorily required to get admission in primary
schools, yet it is considered highly essential for young
children, on the following grounds:

a) Physical Growth

The child is growing out of infancy and continues
his period of vigorous. physical activity. His limbs
are flexible; grow strong and active. He is a wanderer
and explorer and he needs spacious place for his
physical growth. Here he needs objects and
materials with the help of which he continues his
exploration. He needs an affectionate teacher who
will understand him in all his moods and help him to
be himself and to learn. All houses can not ensure

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 21
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 21
30 Contemporary India and Education
ee

such stimulating atmosphere for the young kids to

learn. This need is fulfilled in the pre-primary school-
setting.

b) Social Development

In India, at present we see that the joint family
system has been largely replaced by the nuclear
family system; small family norms have been
accepted by most people. Both the parents in most
homes, go out for jobs. Hence the pre-school child
at home lacks the company of the peer group as
well as the adoring presence of grand parents. This
affects the social development of the child. Perhaps
for his social membership and play, the nursery
school may offer him enough opportunity to cultivate
desirable social habits and attitudes.

c) Intellectual Development

The child’s intellectual growth starts with the
desire to explore and know his environment. He is
full of curiosity and the enquiring mind is constantly
at work. Like the little ‘Mini’ of Tagore’s Kabuliwallah,
this child is at the pre-operative stage (Piaget) of
cognitive development and is.full of questions about
things and people around him. He imagines, sings,
plays, identifies people and objects and mentally he

31
Levels of Education

$$ eee
is ever on the alert. To stimulate the spirit of many
and provide for opportunities to explore and expan ,
pre-primary education is considered essential.

d) Emotional Development

Young children do not know how to control cea
emotions; they are adamant and become angry if
their wishes are not satisfied then and there; they
are highly possessive. and do not stop their crying till
their demands are fulfilled. By moving with the peers
in the school, children learn to control their emotions
and their temper tantrums get mellowed.

e) Fulfillment of Psychological Needs .

The pre-school-goer has several psychological
needs too, which crave satisfaction, for building up

his psychological health. He is egocentric and views

and understands. ‘the world from his point of view.
He asserts himself when the occasion demands. He
is independent, sociable and friendly but at times he
‘is the subject ofan irate temper. He manipulates:
objects, is’ creative and artistic. Through play and

: fantasy, development of his psyche continues. The

pre-school creative curriculum in an atmosphere of
uninhibited freedom offers him the challenges for his
psychological health.

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 22
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 22
32 Contemporary India and efucation

Children in the pre-schoo] stage are highly
malleable and hence we could quickly bring desirable
changes in their behaviour. By arranging to provide
planned curricular experiences we could cultivate
good habits, positive attitudes and other desirable
personality traits like friendship, love and care for
others, persistence, sacrifice, tolerance etc. which
will serve them in good stead in their future. Thus
the programme of pre-school education sows the
seeds for the balanced personality development and
good mental health.

2:02:3 Objectives of Pre-primary
Education

Indian Education Commission (1964-66) had .

recommended the following eight objectives for pre-
primary education.

1) Development of good health habits and
basic skills for personal adjustment, such as
toilet habits, dressing, washing, cleaning etc.

2) Development of desirable social attitudes
and habits in the children so that they should

. be able to participate effectively in group
activities and should be sensitive to the rights
and privileges of others.

Levels of Education 33

3) Development of aesthetic sense in children

4) Development of emotional maturity in
children so that they should be able to
understand, accept, control and express their
feelings and emotions.

5) Development and stimulation of intellectual
curiosity of the children concerning the
environment so that they ‘should be able to
understand the world where they live in.

6) Provision of ample opportunities to the children
to enable them to explore, investigate and

experiment.

7) Provision of opportunity for self-expression
so that creativity in them should be encouraged
and developed.

8) Provision. of such conditions as are helpful in
the development of good physique; muscular
coordination and basic motor skills.

2:02:4 Teaching Methods in Nursery

Education

Morning prayer, spontaneous conversation,
songs, stories, creative activities, group games etc.
are the daily activities of pre-primary children through

é

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 23
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 23
34 Contemporary India and Education
EEE

which they learn various facts and ideas. Play way
method of teaching is given utmost importance. Toys
and gther play materials are given to children
according to their age and gender. For example male
children generally prefer to play with cycles, motor
Cars etc. and female-children like dolls of various
types. The main aim of these pre-primary schools is
to develop the skills of speaking in children to express
their mind and attain language fluency.

2:03 Primary Education and its
Objectives

2:03:1 Primary Education Stage

Formal schooling begins with primary education.
Children who have completed the age 5 are admitted
to Class | of the primary school and they study for 5
years. Five years of primary education are crucial
for pupils since the basic three R’s (reading, writing
and arithmetic) and fundamentals in sciences, social
studies and other vital subject experiences are
provided.

2:03:2 Objectives of Primary Education

Primary Education should provide the learner
with opportunities to :

Levels of Education 35

et

1. acquire literacy, numeracy, creativity and
communication skills

2. enjoy learning and develop desire to continue
learning

3. develop ability for critical thinking and logical
judgment

4. appreciate and respect the dignity of work

5. develop desirable social standards, moral.and
religious values

6. develop into a self-disiciplined, physically fit and
healthy person

7. devélop aesthetic values and appreciate own
and other people’s cultures

8. develop awareness and appreciation of the
environment . ‘

9. instil respect and love for own country and the
need for harmonious co-existence

10. develop: awareness of and appreciation for

other nations and international community

11. develop individual talents *

12. promote ocial responsibility and make proper
use of leisure time

‘ 1 '
13. develop awareness and appreciation of the role
of technology in national development

cl-4

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 24
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 24
\ Ul

per ega

}

f

ra i ee ee ek ee ee

ree

DOBRA

Aa %

36 Contemporary India and E lucation

2:04 Secondary Education
2:04:1 Meaning of| Secondary
Education
|
4 Those who have completed 5 years of primary

education study for another 5 years. Only those who
pass the state level public examinations conducted
at the end of 10" std. are said to have completed the
secondary or high school education. Those who
complete secondary education can as per their
choice join either the 2 year higher secondary course
or the 2 year Industrial Trade Certificate course in
ITI’s or in the first year of the 3 year diploma course
in Polytechnics. High school education serves as a
bridge between the community and the practical life
of pupils. The constituents of Secondary education
viz. standards VI, VII, VIII, IX and X could be found
in high schools and higher secondary schools.
Middle schools contain Stds. VI, VII and VIII in
addition to the five standards of primary education.
VI, Vil and VIII Stds. of middle Schools which. form a
part of secondary education go by the name ‘Lower
Secondary Classes’.

2:04:2 Importance of Secondary Education

(i) Secondary education begins where primary

SS

Levels of Education 37

a

education ends. Literacy and learning of 3 R’s
are considered as the major objectives of
primary education. But if education ends at this
age, psychologically when the pupils
potentialities are waiting to be developed during
and after 13 to 14 years, it amounted to the
laying of the foundation without constructing any
building on it.

;

(ii) During adolescence individual’s potentialities

’ . are developed; his ability, aptitudes, and
attitudes, interest and character are shaped at
this stage. Accordingly appropriate education
should be provided to adolescents. After .
secondary education, adolescents enter life -
knowledgeably and mentally alert.

(iii) Teachers for primary schools are drawn from
those who have completed secondary
education and also the 2 year diploma course
in teacher education.

To develop specialization in areas of: knowledge
and for undergoing professional competence,
students opt for higher education for which the

_ basis is formed at this stage. Thus secondary
education establishes the link between primary
and higher education.

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 25
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 25
38

‘Contemporary India and Education

(v) The effective terminal behaviour resulting

(vi)

2:04:3

(i)

(i)

fsom secondary education alone will help the
student either to opt for higher education or

choose a job for his livelihood.

Our developing country requires a strong
edifice of-secondary education for its
economic growth and. industrial expansion.
This base helps the citizens in planning the
future economy of the nation.

Objectives’ of
Education

Secondary

Encourage pupils to continue their education
after the primary level.

Facilitate to learn more in depth and breadth
the subjects studied at the primary level and
widen the knowledge and attitude of pupils.

Train them in citizenship so that the pupils may
become good citizens of this democratic country.

Prepare them for higher education in academic
subjects.

Impart them vocational skills and prepare for
employment.

(vi)

(vii)

(viii)

(ix)

(x)

(xi)

38

Levels of Education

Arrange for learning a third language at the

lower secondary stage.

Focus on improving the standard of general
education.

Make all students learn the mother tongue,
English, a third language, Mathematics,
General Science, Social Science, Physical
Education, Creative Work related to Fine Arts
and Work experience. ,
Provide students subsidised transport and text

books

Establish separate girls’ schools wherever

“necessary.

Establish a pace-setting school (Navodaya

School) in-each district. ;
ar ‘

Secondary Education Commission in its report,

state the following as the objectives of secondary

education.

Education should aim at developing children as

- creative citizens with requisite knowledge and

discipline

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 26
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 26
G

6 ©

40 Contemporary India and Education
$s

- functionally efficient and progressive leaders
who can dedicate themselves for the industrial
advancement and economic, development of
Our country,

- balanced-personalities having deep faith in our
culture and be able to appreciate our literature
and fine arts.

2:05
2:05:1

Higher Secondary Education

Meaning of Higher Secondary
Education

After Kothari Education Commission (1964-66)
recommendations were accepted, our country opted
for the uniform pattern of educationi.e. 10 +2 +3.
In this the +2 level is called higher secondary stage
of education (Classes XI and XII). In States like
Tamilnadu, Higher Secondary Schools offer five
years of high school education (Class VI to X) and
two years of higher secondary education. In states
like Karnataka, Kerala etc. the higher secondary
classes ‘are run in the separate educational
institutions called ‘Junior Colleges’. Thus higher
secondary stage of education constitutes the terminal
stage for majority of pupils'‘who are to take up jobs
and the rest pursue collegiate education in Arts and

Levels of Education At

Science Colleges or Professional Degree Colleges.
The Higher Secondary Course consists of two streams
- (i), Academic Stream and (ii) Vocational Stream.
Both the streams are of equal value; help to continue
higher education of appropriate nature. But
vocational stream was considered more helpful for
self employment. At the higher secondary stage,
students are allowed to study subjects of their choice
which are generally presented as a block consisting
of three or four subjects. The academic stream is
meant for those who wish to continue their higher
education and the vocational stream helps pupils to
get self-employed or take up vocations with some
more training. Higher secondary classes are
generally handled by trained post-graduate teachers
or professional experts. Higher Secondary. Education
gives more importance for practical work and in-depth

~

study of subjects.
2:05:2. Aims of Higher Secondary
Education CO
The major aims of higher secondary education
according to Kothari Education Commission are :
i) Preparation for higher education and
professional education.

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 27
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 27
42 ‘ Contemporary India and Education

ii) Strengthen the vocational stream of education
so that pupils coming out of schools join the
labour force and enhance its efficiency for
productivity.

iii) Developmentof social and national integration,
and consolidation of democratic way of life.

iv) Striving to build character by cultivating social,
moral and spiritual values.

v) Training in citizenship and rational thinking:
2:06 Higher Education Stage
2:06:1 Meaning of Higher Education

After completing twelve years of school
education (higher secondary education), students
join Degree Colleges or University Departments to
pursue three year degree courses. On completing
degree courses students can join postgraduate
courses of two years duration. Well reputed colleges
and University Departments offer research courses
like M.Phil, Ph.D., D.Lit. etc. Education pursued after
the higher secondary course either in affiliated
Colleges or University Departments is called “Higher
Education” or “University Education”.

43
Levels of Education

ree
2:06:2 Aims of Higher Education
n Education Commission

According to India ;
e the objectives of

(1964-66) the following ar
University Education :

i) To seek and cultivate new knowledge.

ii) To engage vigorously and fearlessly in the
pursuit of truth. :

iii) To interpret old knowledge and beliefs in the
light of new needs and discoveries.

iv)’ To provide the right kind of leadership in all

walks of life.

v) ‘To identify gifted youth, and help them develop
their potentials to the full by cultivating physical
fitness, de }eloping the powers of the mind and
cultivating fight interests, attitudes and moral
and intellectual values.

vi) To providel society with competent men and

women trained in Agriculture, Arts, Medicine,

. Science ahd Technology and various other
profession $.

vii) To promote equality and social justice.

t

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 28
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 28
ra a 2 ee ee

|
\
44 Contemporary Indla and Education '

i

viii) To reduce social and |cultural differences
through diffusion of education.

ix) To develop research attitude and enquiry spirit
among the intellectuals.

x) To help to Spread adult education

xi) To develop values needed for good life in
individuals and society.

2:06:3 Problems in Higher Education

i) Though universities have multiplied in number,
physical facilities available in them have. not
really increased. Most of the Universities are
ill-equipped and under staffed.

ii) Universities function in isolation, cutoff from the
socio-economic life of the people.

iii) The educational and research standard in most
of the Indian Universities are very low.
Infrastructural facilities, services of expert
teachers, availability of .student-services and
quality of teaching are all poor, not
commensurate with the number of students
studying in them.

iv) As the number of graduates coming out of

Levels of Education 45

colleges and universities is constantly

increasing, the problem of unemployment

among educated youths has become acute.

University education has not developed the

much needed competency and skills in the

students rendering them unemployable.
2:06:4 Improving the Quality of Higher
Education

i) Association of Indian Universities should be
attempted by establishing a net work
arrangement among them to pool their
resources and participate in projects of national
‘importance.

ii) The U.G.C. should develop some “Major
Universities” where ‘first’ class post graduate
work and research would be possible and
whose standard would be comparable to best -
institutions of their type in any part of the world.

iii) Based on the feedback regarding the
performance of the cglleges affiliated to
Universities (particularly considering the
standard of education and richness of
programmes offered) “Autonomous Status”

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 29
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 29
46 Contemporary India and Education
—

should be conferred on number of colleges.
Similarly autonomous status should be
granted for deserving Departments in the
Universities.

iv) Centres of-Advanced Study in specific
subjects are to be developed to take up
quality research and impart post-graduate
education. . .

Vv) New courses of study are to be introduced,
periodical revision of curriculum and
examination reforms are to be undertaken.

vi) The infrastructural, laboratory and library
facilities are to be increased significantly in
major universities.

vii) Teachers should be required to undergo
‘Orientation Course’ before entering the
service and take up periodical ‘Refresher
Courses’ for career improvement.

viii) ‘Credit Based Learning’ which gives
importance for project work, seminars,
practical work etc. should be incorporated in
all courses. Lecture method should be
discouraged at the higher education level.

Levels of Education 47

ix) Talented students are to be attracted to higher
education by a scheme of scholarships and

fellowships.

x) Regional languages should be adopted as

P
d
:
fl

media of education at the university stage ina _ |

phased manner..

xi) Students of higher education should be made
to practise civilized forms of behaviour and
follow strict discipline.

xii) Establishment of Indian Education Service to
attract talented teachers on all India level to
serve in institutions of higher education will go
a long way’in raising the standard of Indian

ro

iid i
2:07 Professional Education

2:07:1 What is Meant by Professional

‘E ucation ;

In higher ducation, there are two streams viz.
‘Arts and Sciente’ and ‘Professional Education’. Arts
and Science education, tries to expand the students’
perspective and helps to improve their knowledge
and skills i.e. its: aim is not to train students for a

specific vocation. Whereas the aim of the

ra

r
-

=..

ae

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 30
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 30
48 Contemporary India and Education |
mw_ !—————__ i : H
Professional education is to train students to acquire
mastery in the professional subjects and thereby to

increase the Productivity of the Gountry.

Professional education includes. faculties such
as Engineering, Medicine, Agriculture, Law
Accountancy and Auditing and Teacher Education.

,

Professional education blesides providing

professional knowledge and professional skills to

, Students, also guide them to follow and nurture the
professional ethics in their respective fields.

2:07:2

Stages of
Education

Professional

The important stages of Professional Education
are: (i) Graduate Professional Education
(ii) Postgraduate Professional Education and
Doctoral Professional Education.

The educational qualification prescribed for
joining the graduate professional education isa pass
in the higher secondary education; for postgraduate
professional. education, a pass in the graduate
professional education with related professional
experience and for doctoral professional education,
getting qualified in the postgraduate professional

Levels of Education 49

education with related field / departmenta!
experience.

' 2:08
2:08:1

Distance Education

Meaning and Definition of
Distance Education

If teaching and learning are separated either by
distance or time, then such type of arrangement of
teaching-learning process comes under distance
education.

Prof. Helmberg (1981) defined distance
education as the one in which education is provided
at different levels and that too in the absence of direct
and continuous supervision of teachers. Further,
educational instruction need not be provided in a
particular campus or classroom. However the
distance education programmes are well planned
and structured by a panel of experts in the field;
proper instructional materials are prepared and
arrangements are made for students to get frequent
“guidance from teachers and periodically get
evaluated. In short it-could be termed as ‘open-
education’. In this, students have full freedom to
learn the subjects of their choice at their own

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 31
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 31
50 Contemporary India and Education
Pe

speed and that too at the time of their choice,
This is truly a ‘New Information Order’.

Television Lessons

Student -
learning

Teachers/Guides

Radio Broadcast

Video Discs/C.D.’s

Educational
Institutions

State Library

Learning Centre

Correspondence
Courses

Direct contact classes

2:08:2 Need for Distance Education

The need for distance education in India has
increased in manifolds during the last 10 years as is
-evidenced by the number of students learning
through distance education mode. Distance
education programmes become all the more
important due to the following reasons:

i) To manage the ever increasing student -
population seeking higher education

51

Levels of Education

ii) To regulate the huge rush in formal universities
by diverting a sizeable portion to distance
education programmes.

iii) To make available formal education even for
those who are outside the regular school and
college system

iv) To provide education in various disciplines as
a continuation of non-formal education

programmes.
2:08:3 Different Formats of Distance
Education : ‘

|
Distance education has taken different shapes
in various countries. Notable among them are:

4

i) In addition to the correspondence lessons and
radio broadcasts, arranging for some week-end
contact classes ; -

ii) Providing Support to the school system to offer
additional courses or additional information and
knowledge through postal lessons, television
and radio broadcasts.

iii) Arranging for usual learning for those who could
hot reach in the regular school system. [e.g.
Offering music lessons, vocational courses in

as | .
i . ‘ . 4

o&

6

>»

€

é

3

4
€
e

=

=

“|
1
oy

a

—,

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 32
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 32
o ©

@ 6 @

®

@® G

52

Contemporary India and Education

oo eeeSeSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSFheE

different trades, science education
programmes etc.] '

As a continuation of adult education
programmes arranging for agricultural
broadcasts, Radio anjd T.V. Learning
Movements, Radio Schools as found in some
Latin American countries letc.

2:08:4 Salient Features of Distance

% the

Education

|

Distance education programmes differ from
regular university education and contain the

‘following innovative aspects.

i)

ii)

iii)

iv)

v)

The presence of teacher is not mandatory for
teaching/ instruction

Lessons prepared by a panel of teachers
could be put into use at various centres by
different teachers while providing instruction.

Individual study by learners is emphasized

Students learn independently through
different activities and media

Importance is given for the instructional
materials (course materials) prepared by the
educational institution offering distance
education

Levels of Education : 53

nnn SE

vi) Students can learn by remaining at home or
‘earning while earning’.

vii) Students and teachers meet in the classroom
only for certain educational activities.

viii) Education gets democratised and reach out the 5
doors of individual learners.

ix) As students learn on their own self-efforts, there
is no chance for standard of education getting
diluted. Further cost of education is also cheap
compared to formal education.

x) Various kinds of media are employed to present
the information and knowledge contained in the
lessons; this serves as an alternative to teacher-
student interaction.

2:08:5 Correspondence Courses in
Distance Education

Correspondence-education is an important
method of providing education under distance
learning mode. It is not a private system of education. °
Correspondence courses depend heavily on printed °
materials (called learning packages) containing
structured lessons along with test papers, the
responses of which are periodically evaluated by the

\

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 33
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 33
54 Contemporary India and Education

eee
Directorate of correspondence courses. Personal
contact programmes are also held, in which
Specialists clarify and/or elaborate ideas already

conveyed to the students through the printed
lessons.

Sending Learning
Packages

Directorate of
Correspondence
Courses

Submission of
Assignments by
Students

Student -
Learning

Returning the
Evaluated Assignments

Use is now also made of the radio and T.V. to
enrich the learning experiences of the students
enrolled in correspondence programmes [For
example, A.I.R. broadcasts such programmes for
students in the southern region enrolled in the
Madurai Kamraj University]. Now such courses in
science subjects like physics, chemistry, botany,
zoology etc. involving practicals are also offered. The
effectiveness of such correspondence courses
depends upon the analytical clarity and effectiveness
of representation of the lessons prepared as well as
on the proper motivation of the students. However,
it cannot be doubted that such courses, in

Levels of Education 55
a
conjunction with open universities, are of great value
in stimulating intellectual progress, particularly in

developing countries like India.
2:08:6 Distance Education in India

For the first time, to launch distance education
programmes in India, Delhi University started in 1962
the School of Correspondence and Continuing
Education. Today, more than 80 Indian universities
are offering distance education Programmes. reica
Gandhi National Open University (IGNOU) is a
pioneer in this field at present and reaches out
many an innovative course at the door steps of
learners. Almost all universities in Tamilnadu [like
Madras, Madurai — Kamaraj, Annamalai, Alagappa,
Bharathiar, Bharathidasan, Mother Teresa
Universities] offer open university programmes as
well as correspondence courses.

2:08:7 Advantages of Distance
Education
(i) Distance education helps those who have
discontinued education in the formal system but
wi ing to continue their education. Further it is
also inexpensive.

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 34
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 34
56

Contemporary India and Education

ee ce ee
(ii) As those in employment could further their

(iii)

(vi)

promotional prospects in professional career by
improving their educational qualifications,
vertical mobility takes place in the society.

Those wha fail to get admission in colleges and
universities, those disinterested to learn on a
full-time basis, or have compulsions to
discontinue studies and take up some job could
fulfil their desire of gaining a university degree
through distance education programmes.

As students of distance education learn with

self-motivation, quality of |education. received

remains high. Further many kinds of wastages
(time, human labour, materials consumed in the
instructional process in: regular colleges) are
also avoided.

Distance education eases considerably the
pressure for admission in regular colleges and
schools and thereby avoiding over crowded
classrooms.

As students of distance education programmes
could learn by remaining at home itself, the
problem of increasing traffic congestion does not
get accentuated.

Levels of Education 57
ee
(vii) Expenses incurred for distance education

programmes are comparatively cheaper than
those of formal system of education.

(viii) As distance education permits earning while
learning, it helps to avoid wastage of human
labour due to learners taking up full-time study
in regular schools and colleges.

2:09 Open School System
2:09:1 Concept of ‘Open Education’

No formal educational qualifications are required
to join the open school system. Any individual, above
the age of 16 knowing reading and writing can join
the foundation course in the open school system.
There are entrance examinations to join the various
levels of education in the open system of education.
Any one who is successful in the entrance
examination for a particular level of education can

join the course of that level, be it secondary

education, graduation or post-graduyation. Courses
offered are also highly diverse, need-based and life-
oriented and highly relevant to modern times.

Modular approach is followed in the preparation
of course materials. Apart from the study materials
supplied to the students, periodical personal contact

é

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 35
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 35
58 Contemporary India and Education
eee

Programmes are also arranged to clarify students’
doubts and conduct curricular practicals. Most
significant aspect of open education system is that
it increasingly employs the various multisensory
media like the audio and video cassettes, radio and
television ‘broadcasts. Students can also visit the
‘Learning Resource Centres’ established under this
system at various locations and make use of them.

Open education system has some unique in-built
features like the scope for pupils’ self-learning,
compensating for the opportunities lost during one’s
childhood etc. Thus open education system is totally
a novel idea in providing life-long education.

2:09:2 Emergence of Open School
System in India

England’s open University is a forerunner for the
open education system of many countries in the
world including India. Expanding this concept further
and extending it to provide school education who fail
to join schools, the then Director of NCERT appointed
a committee in 1974 to study this proposal and
prepare a detailed plan for it. This committee studied
the feasibility of starting open schools in India and
prepared a ‘Draft Plan’ for it. The draft plan submitted

Levels of Education 59

r of NCERT to the Ministry of
t of India was accepted and

n School Education

by the Directo
Education, Governmen
a separate Directorate of Ope
was established in July 1979. Following this, open
school was started at Chennai in 1985 to provide
continuing education for those who have completed

- their two year study successfully in Non-formal

Education centres. In 1990. National Institute of
Open Schooling was established through an act of
Parliament and it is presently functioning with its
headquarters located at Noida in Uttar Pradesh
having its branch offices in all States in our country.
It has more than 1500 study centres across the
country to provide open school education. In
Tamilnadu 27 schools serve as study centres for
open school systara of education. In Chennai’ such
study centres function at C.P. Ramaswamy. lyer
Foundation, Alwarpet, Kendriya Vidyalaya at Avadi
and MEAS! school at Broadway.

2:09:3 Objectives of Open School System

1. To provide education to all those who are

employed and'completed 16 years of age, even

if they have no formal education, by making

them qualified to continue education through a
system of foundation courses.

é

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 36
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 36
60 Contemporary Indla and Education

_2. To provide opportunities for the following

Categories of people who could not study in
formal schools.

(i) Economically poor. particularly rural
housewives :

(ii) School drop-outs (Discontinued studies
after VII Std.) |

(iii) Failed in X or XII Standard in the formal
system of education.

(iv) Those desirous of continuing vocational
education or studying need based life-
oriented courses / subjects.

3. To relax age-restrictions for those who wish to
continue their education:

2:09:4 Style of Functioning of Open
Schools

In the open school system, any one who has
completed 16 years of age could seek admission.
Lessons are sent by post and personal contact
classes are arranged in the weekends and public
holidays. Those who could not attend these class’
can remain at home and learn. Courses are
conducted at five levels-lll, V, VIII, X and XII

Levels of Education 61

standards. For X and XIl standard levels students
should learn atleast five subjects from among

' English, Regional language, Science, Mathematics,

Social studies and Vocational subjects. Those who
successfully complete a course and pass the
examination (held twice in a year) are awarded a
certificate which is recognised throughout India.
Successful candidates can either continue their
studies in the open education system or switch over
to the formal system of eduction. Education in the
open school system is highly inexpensive. For
example one can complete the X std. course in about
Rs. 1000/-.

About 3,90,000 students are studying now in
these schools whereas the strength was only 40,000
in 1990.

With the certificates issued by the open school,
‘one can continue his studies by joining secondary /
higher. secondary school and college; or join the
distance education programme of.the Open
University, This system of education is beneficial to
educational development. of down trodden
particularly those who are below the poverty line.

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 37
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 37
62 Contemporary India and Education
Sn

2:09:5 Advantages of Open School
System of Education

Poverty, illiteracy and social backwardness are
Prevalent across all sections of the community
Irrespective of race, language, religion and
Occupational groups. It is highly impossible to provide
education to millions of such people in developing
countries by formal system of education alone. In
countries like India to provide mass education in the
face of ever increasing population, open education
system becomes indispensable. Open School
education helps in:

(i) democratising education by expanding
educational opportunities to all

(ii) raising the educational qualifications of people.

(iii) eradicating illiteracy by joining hands with non-
formal education

(iv) continuing education for those who are
employed.

(v) reaching out education to the door steps of
individual learners.

(vi) raising the productivity and performance level
of working force in the country.

Levels of Education

OOO

Conclusion (
education such

a

In this lesson,| various levels of
as pre-primary education, primary ediGenioM,
secondary education, higher secondary education,
higher education, professional education, distance :
education and open education and of these %
objectives of each levels of education have been

explained in detail.

Review Questions:
1. Explain the meaning of pre-primary education
and its need. (B) [Ans. 2:02:1 + 2:02:2]

2. What are|the objectives of pre-primary
education? (B) [Ans. 2:02:3]

3. State the. teaching methods followed in pre
primary education. (C) [Ans. 2:02:4]

4. What do you mean by primary education? What
are its objectives? (B) [Ans. 2:03:1 + 2:03:2]

5. Explain the meaning of Secondary Education.
(C) — [Ans. 2:04:1]

6. Pointout the Importance of Secondary
Education.'(C) [Ans. 2:04:2]

A

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 38
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 38
63

—==ch
EE

=[=_ce
ge

en

aT 1 |

DARA DHAAAAARAH HOH

fj =

CEE BOEOO EDU GWG GG G

a or

64

Contemporary India and Education
——————__—- - — * ——

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

What are the objectives of Secondary
Education? (B) [Ans. 2:04:3] ;

What do you mean by higher secondary stage
of education? (C) [Ans. 2:05:1] |
State the aims of. Higher Secondary Education.
(C) [Ans. 2:05:2] a

What do you mean by Higher Education? (C)
[Ans. 2:06:1]
State the aims of University Education. (B)
[Ans. 2:06:2]
Mention the problems of higher education. (C)
[Ans. 2:06:3]

Suggest measures for improving the quality of
higher education. (B) [Ans. 2:06:4]

What do you mean by ‘Professional
Education’? (C) [Ans: In 2:07:1, first and third

paragraphs]

Explain the levels of Professional Education.
(B) [Ans: 2:07:2]

Mention the different kinds of Professional
Education. [Ans: In 2:07:1, second paragraph
only] z

Levels of Education 65

17.

18.

19.

20.

Al.
22.

23.
25.
26.

27.

Explain the concept of ‘Open Education’. (C)
[Ans: 2:09:1]

What are the objectives of ‘Open Schoo
System’? (C) [Ans: 2:09:3] ;

Explain briefly the style of functioning of open
schools. (C)[Ans: 2:09:4]

Mention the advantages of open school system
of education. (C) [Ans: 2:09:5]

Define ‘Distance Education’. (C) [Ans: 2:08:1]
Explain the concept of ‘Distance Education’. (C)
[Ans: 2:08:1]

What is the need for ‘Distance Education’? (C)
[Ans: 2:08:2]

What are the different formats of distance
education? (C) [Ans: 2:08:3]

State the salient features of distance education.
(C) [Ans: 2:08:4]

Explain the mode of providing correspondence
education. (B) [Ans: 2:08:5]

Mention the advantages of distance education.
(C) [Ans: 2:08:7]

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 39
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 39
LESSON - 3 en

INDIAN CONSTITUTIONAL VALUES
AND EDUCATION

3:0 Introduction

India got independence from the British on 15th
August, 1947. The Constitution of the country,
prepared by a council consisting of eminent persons
drawn from different walks of life and headed by
Dr.B.R. Ambedkar, the then Law Minister of the
.interim government, after detailed discussion and
debate, was adopted on November 26, 1949 and
came into force on January 26, 1950. The

Constitution mirrors the hopes and aspirations of the
“people of India.

Indian Constitution has introduced new values
to the independent India. Important among them are
Justice, Liberty, Equality and Fraternity.

In this lesson, Preamble of the Constitution and
the four values enshrined in it, Fundamental Rights
and Duties of Indian citizens, Directive Principles of
the State Policy and Education, Education and
Freedom, Justice, Equality and Fraternity, Meaning

Indian Constitutional Values and Education 67

of ‘Social Justice’, Education as a means of achieving
social justice, Right to Education Act (RTE) and the
background of enacting it, Salient features of Right
to Education Act, Provisions in the seventh schedule
of the Constitution, Transfer of Education from the
State List to Concurrent List in 1976, Implications of
Education being in the Concurrent List and
Arguments putforth against retaining "Education" in
the Concurrent List are taken up for elaborate
discussion.

3:01 Structure of Constitution of India

Indian Constitution originally contained a
preamble, 8 Schedules, 22 Appendices and 395
Articles. At present there are 448 Articles and 25
Appendices and 12 Schedules. The Fourth Schedule
in the Constitution deals with the “Directive
Principles” which gives the directive guidelines for
the Government to frame its policies. One can not

approach the court to get direction to implement the ~

Directive Principles. The Seventh Schedule of the
constitution lists:‘the educational responsibilities of
the Central and State Governments. List I, called the
‘Union List’ narrates the responsibilities of the Central
Government. List Il pertains to the responsibilities

Cl-6

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 40
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 40
c

i,
6 © G

rer
6&6 ©

@ 6 GG

ST eee | — |

eee

© OGoO EG

68 Contemporary India and Education

ce

of the State Governments. .List It called the
“Concurrent List” deals with those items that come
under the joint responsibilities of the Central and
State Governments. a

3:02 Preamble of Indian Constitution

The introductory part of the Constitution called
“The Preamble” outlines the'social philosgphy which
should govern all our institutions, including the
educational institutions. Thé preamble of the
Constitution states : “We the people of India, having
solemnly resolved to constitute India into a Sovereign,
Socialist, Secular, Democratic Republic to secure to
all its citizens :

Justice - Social, economic and|political;

Liberty of thought, expressioh, belief, faith and
worship;

Equality of status and of opportunity; and to promote
among them all; ‘

Fraternity - Assuring the dignity of the individual and
the unity and the integrity of the nation.”

[Note: The two terms Socialist and Secular were
added to the original text of the Preamble through
the 42° Amendment in 1976]

Indian Constitutional Values and Education 69

ee ee
(i) Justice

Society consists of varied sections and groups

of people. Justice means, ensuring the protection of

not only the individual rights but also keeping in mind

the social needs and progress. Justice is of three

kinds. They are:

a) Social Justice: Though the Constitution has
banned the discrimination on the basis of caste,
religion, race and gender, the government
should provide special privileges in education
and employment to socially marginalized people
and the oppressed class in order to uplift their
social status. This comes under Social Justice.

b) Economic Justice: The Directive Principles
of Indian Constitution have laid down that the
government should work with the aim to create
a fair economic system in which the resources
of the country are evenly distributed to all i.e.
the government should give priority to raise the
standard of living of poor people.

c) Political Justice: Political Justice is concerned
with all people getting equal opportunities and
being. treated equally with respect to holding
political posts, getting voting rights, being

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 41
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 41
70 Contemporary India and Education
ne vO

elected as political representatives, having free
and fair elections and contesting in them.
Reservation of seats in Parliament (Lok Sabha)
and State Assemblies for Scheduled Castes
and Scheduled Tribes, are included under
Political Justice.

(ii) Freedom

Freedom relates to thoughts, speech, writing,
beliefs and faith, and practices of worship. All citizens
have the freedom to speak or write his views on any
subject without harming the country or society.
Citizens have the right to criticize the government
and its rule. For the efficient functioning of the
government, It is essential for the citizens to have
the freedom of expression. Similarly, everyone has
the right to follow any religion of his choice and
practices of worship. Every citizen has the right to
act according to his conscience (subject to abiding

law). State will treat all religions equally without any
discrimination.

iii) Equality
This is related to improving social status and

opportunities. Equality implies that all are equal
before the eyes of law. As democratic norms have

| 71
Indian Constitutional Values and Education

deep rooted belief in the dictum “all men are created
equal”, equal opportunities should be provided to all
without any discrimination of religion, caste, gender
or other considerations. Equal opportunities should
not be taken to mean as extending the same kind of
opportunities to fall; but it should be taken to mean
as providing appropriate educational opportunities
to all adequately, according to their abilities and
aptitudes. In brief, besides giving education to large
number of seoplb, extending adequate opportunities
for every one’s abilities to grow to the fullest extent
possible.

‘Equality’ includes positive ideas such as
providing equal rights to all, distributing the available
resources equally, providing equal opportunities to
progress and ‘keeping in mind that people differ in
their capacities; abi ities and skills and accordingly
implementing ‘equality’ in a fair manner. That means,
making special provisions for the socially backward
classes, weaker ‘sections, tribal people, women and
the disabled, should not be construed as violation of
equality. In fact, ‘equality also includes the negative
ideas such as abolishing the man-made discrimina-
tions and removing the special titles, rights and

“4

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 42
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 42
& )

)

i

ay i
>@® @ ®

©o © @

|
) )
Geen) eens an en mea —

“eo ® ®&

@ © oO

72 Contemporary India and Education

concessions enjoyed by those in some socially-high
class.

iv) Fraternity

Fraternity refers to ensuring individual’s dignity
and nation’s unity and integrity: Noble qualities like
considering every one (except father, mother and
wife) as one’s own brother / sister and finding “unity
in diversity” should be cultivated: among students.
Only through this, people could live in harmony
without having any social coriflicts and reinforcce

democracy.

3:03 Fundamental Rights and Duties
of Indian Citizens

In the Constitution of India, fundamental rights
and duties of citizens are prescribed. Articles 14 to
32 deal with Fundamental Rights and Article 51A
states the Fundamental Duties, They are explained
hereunder.

3:03:1 Fundamental Rights in Indian
Constitution

The Fundamental Rights are defined as basic
human freedoms that every Indian citizen is entitled
to enjoy for a proper and harmonious development

Indian Constitutional Values and Education 73

of personality. These rights universally apply to all
citizens, irrespective of race, place of birth, religion,
caste or gender. Aliens (persons who are not citizens)
are also considered in matters like equality before
law. They are enforceable by the courts, subject to
certain restrictions.

The eight fundamental rights recognized by the

‘Indian constitution are:

1. Right to equality: (Articles 14 to 18) : Itincludes
equality before law, prohibition of discrimination
on grounds of religion, race, caste, gender or
place of birth, and equality of opportunity in
matters of employment, abolition of
untouchability and abolition of titles.

2. Right to freedom: (Articles 19 -22) : This
includes freedom of speech and expression,
assembly, association or union or cooperatives,
movement, residence, and right to practice any
profession or occupation (some of these rights
are subject to security of the State, friendly
relations with foreign countries, public order,

_. decency or morality), right to life and liberty,
protection with respect to conviction in offences
and protection against arrest and detention in
certain cases.

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 43
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 43
74 Contemporary India and Education

TT

3. Right against exploitation: (Articles 23 24) :
This prohibits all forms of forced labour, child
labour and trafficking of human beings

Right to freedom of religion: (Articles 25 -28)
This includes freedom of conscience and free

profession, practice, and propagation of religion,
freedom to manage religious affairs, freedom
from certain taxes and freedom for religious
instructions in certain educational institutions.

5. Cultural and Educational rights: (Articles 29 —
30) : These preserve the right of any section of
citizens to conserve their culture, language ‘or
script, and right of minorities to establish and

administer educational institutions of their
choice.

6. Right to constitutional remedies: (Article 32) : It
gives the right for enforcement of Fundamental
Rights.

7. Right to Education: (Article 21A) : It is the latest
addition to the Fundamental Rights. According
to this Act, it is the fundamental right of all
children of age 6 to 14 to get education.

ion 75
Indian Constitutional Values and Educatio

een

8. Right to Information: Article 19(1): AM stands
for Right to|Information and has been given the
status of a fundamental right under Article 19(1)
of the Constitution. It provides for the right of "
general public to get information from any
government department (except country's

security and foreign affairs).

Ptarvelenmaaniie rights for Indians have also been
aimed at overturning the inequalities of pre-
independence social practices. Specifically, they
have also been uséd to abolish untouchability (Article
17) arid using titles before name (Article 18) and thus
discrimination of all types. They also forbid
trafficking human beings and forced labour. They also
protect cultural and educational rights of ethnic and
religious minorities by allowing them to preserve their

languages and ‘also establish and-administer their
own educational institutions. Any citizen having any
grievence that his/her fundamental right has been
affected, can seek remedies through Court. This
protects the citizens from the authority of the State.
Fundamental rights are there to ensure that all
citizens are treated equally and with dignity.

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 44
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 44
Sits

UWB a
Se
> SOHO GCBKCBHGEEGEG

76 Contemporary India and Education

3:03:2 Fundamental Duties in Indian
Constitution

Following duties are enlisted as fundamental
duties of every Indian citizen, as per the 42"

Amendment to the Constitution, Part IVA of Article
51A. “et

To abide by the Constitution and respect its
ideals and institutions, the. National: Flag and
the National Anthem;

2. To cherish and follow the noble ideals which
inspired our national struggle for freedom;
|

| ¢
3. To uphold and protect the sovereignty, unity and
integrity of India;

To defend the country ard render national
service when called ee do so;

5. To promote harmony and the spirit of common
brotherhood amongst all. the people of India
transcending religious, linguistic and regional
or sectional diversities; to renounce practices
derogatory to the dignity of women;

6. To value and preserve the rich heritage of our
composite culture;

Indian Constitutional Values and Education 77

ee $$

7.. To protect and improve the natural environment
including forests, lakes, rivers and wild life, and
to have compassion for living creatures;

8. To develop the scientific temper, humanism and
the spirit of inquiry and reform;

9. To safeguard public property and to abjure
violence;

10. To strive towards excellence in all spheres of

. individual and collective activities sq that the

nation constantly rises to higher levels of
endeavour and achievement.

11. To provide opportunities for education by the
parent or guardian, to his child, or a ward

between the ages of 6 and 14 years as the case
may be.

3:04 Directive Principles of the State
Policy and Education

3:04:1 Directive Principles of the State
Policy

The Directive Principles of State Policy,
embodied in Part IV from Articles 36 to 51 of the

Constitution, are directions given to the State to guide

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 45
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 45
78 Contemporary India and Education
the establishment of an economic and social
democracy, as proposed by the Preamble.

The State is expected to keep these principles
in mind while framing laws and policies. But these
Cannot be enforced by any Court of Law. The
Directive Principles could be classified under the
following categories:

a) Ideals that State ought to strive towards
achieving

b) Directions for the exercise of legislative and
executive power

c) Rights of the citizens which the State should
secure

These Directive Principles act as a check on the
State and provide yardstick in the hands of electorate
and the opposition parties to measure the
performance of the government.

Now let us see them briefly:
Article 36:

The word “State” used in the Directive Principles
includes the Central and State governments.

79

Indian Constitutional Values and Education 4

Article 37:

be enforced by|any court, but the principles therein
laid down are| nevertheless fundamental in the
governance of the country and it shall be the duty of
the State to apply these principles in making laws..

Article 38:

i) The State shall strive to promote the welfare of
the ‘people by affirming and securing, as
effectively as it may, a social order with social,
economic:and political, justice and shall inform
the same to all the institutions of the national
life.

ii) the State shall, in particular, strive to minimize
the inequalities in income, and endeavour to
eliminate inequalities in status, facilities and
opportunities, not only amongst individuals but
also amongst groups of people: residing in
different ‘areas or engaged in different

vocations.

iii) The State shall ensure individual dignity.

a

ory |

Gre

F on
The provisions contained in this Part shall not. fw

&
Ge
&

oe.

&

®

—

Gx

eo?

%

we
“~~
y

¢ee¢

€

eee

aay

:

TH

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 46
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 46
%

and Education

80 Contemporary India
ae

Article 39: Certain Principles of Policy to be
followed by the State
a) Providing adequate means of livelihood for all
citizens;
b) ‘Ensuring-equal pay for equal work for m
women. , :

en and

c) Striving for the reduction: of the concentration
of wealth and means of production in the hands
of a few, and distribution of community
resources to “subserve the common good”.

Article 39A: Equal Justice and Free Legal Aid

The State shall secure that the operation of the

‘legal system promotes justice, on the basis of equal

opportunity, and shall, in particular, provide free legal
aid, by suitable legislation or schemes or in any other
way, to ensure that “ppertoniuok for securing justice
are not denied to any citizen by/reason of economic
or other disabilities. 3 ;

Article 40: Organization of Village Panchayats

The State shall take steps| to organise village
panchayats and endow them with such powers and
authority as may be necessary ‘to enable them to
function as units of self-government.

Indian Constitutional Values and Education 81

ee
Article 41: Right to work, to education and to
public assistance in certain cases

The State shall, within the limits of its economic
capacity and development, make effective provision
for securing the right to work, to education and to
public assistance in cases of unemployment, old age,
sickness and disablement, and in other cases of
undeserved want.

Article 42: Provision for just and humane
conditions of work and maternity relief

The State shall make provision for securing just

_-and humane conditions of work and for maternity

relief.
Article 43: Living wage, etc., for workers

The State shall endeavor to secure, by suitable
legislation or economic organisation or in any other
way, to all workers, agricultural, industrial or
otherwise, work, a living wage, conditions of work,
ensuring a decent standard of life and full enjoyment
of leisure and social and cultural opportunities and,
in particular, the State shall endeavour to promote
cottage industries on an individual or co-operative
basis in rural areas.

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 47
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 47
82 Contemporary India and Education

Article 43A: Participation of workers in
management of industries _

The State shall take steps, by suitable legislation
or in any other way, to secure the participation of
workers.in the management of undertakings,

establishments or other organisation engaged in any
industry.

Article 44: Uniform civil code for the citizens

The State shall endeavour to secure for the

of India. .

Article 45: Provision for free and compulsory
education for children

The State shall endeavour to provide, within a
period of ten years from the commencement of this
Constitution, for free and compulsory education for all

children until they complete the age of fourteen years. |

Article 46: Promotion of educational and
economic interests of Scheduled Castes,
Scheduled Tribes and other weaker sections

The State shall promote with special care the
educational and economic interests of the weaker

i 3
Indian Constitutional Values and Education 8
ee

sections of the| people, and in particular, of the
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes and shall
protect them fram social injustice and all forms of
exploitation.

Article 47: Duty of the State to raise the level of
nutrition and the standard of living and to improve
public health | |

The State shall regard the raising of the level of
nutrition and the standard of living of its people and
the improvement ‘of public health ‘as among its
primary duties: and, in particular, the State shall
endeavour to ‘bring about prohibition of. the
¢onsumption except for medicinal purpose of
intoxicating drinks and of drugs which are injurious
to health.

Article 48: Organization of agriculture and animal
husbandry) -

The State shall endeavour to organize agriculture
and animal husbandry on modern and scientific lines
and shall, in particular, take steps for preserving and
improving the breeds, and prohibiting the slaughter
of cows and calves and other milch and drought

cattle.
Cl-7

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 48
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 48
Ho
el
eh
.;°
.;°
© =e
C9
C~@
C9
a)
~~»
cs
ee

84 Contemporary India and Education
CO ';.O(—M—>—TD—

Article 48A: Protection and improvemeni_of
environment and safeguarding of forests and
wildlife

The State shall endeavour to protect and improve
the environment. and to safeguard the forests and
wildlife of the country.

Article 49: Protection of monuments and places
and objects of national importance

It shall be the obligation of.the State to protect
every monument or place or object of artistic or
historic interest, declared by. or under law made by
Parliament to be of national. importance, from
spoilation, disfigurement, destruction, removal,
disposal or export, as the case may be.

Article 50: Separation of judiciary from the

executive \

The State shall take steps to separate the
judiciary from the executive in the public services of
the State.

Article 51: Promotion of international peace and
security

The State shall endeavour to

‘dian Constitutional Values and Education 85

a

a) promote international peace and security;

b) maintain just and honourable relations
between nations;

c) foster respect for international law and treaty
obligations in the dealings of organised
people with one another; and

d) encourage settlement of international
disputes by arbitration.

3:04:1:01 Limitations of
Principles

Directive

Directive Principles are the list of directions
for the Central and State governments to
undertake welfare measures for the people and
they have been drafted by our national leaders
with foresight.

+ They are not time bound

+ They cannot be enforced through a court
of law ;

‘e) Some of them took the form of Articles in our
‘Constitution

f) Some directive principles such as Right to

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 49
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 49
86 Contemporary Indla and Education
T_T
Information (Act 22 of 2005), Right to Educatien
(2009-Article 21A), have been made as laws.
3:04:2 Various Constitutional Provi-
sions Relating to Education

The following provisions found in the “Directive
Principles” have a great bearing on the functioning
of the educational system in India.

Article 45 : Provision for Free and Compulsory
Education

Article 45 states : “The State shall endeavour to
provide within a period of 10 years from the
commencement of this Constitution, for free and
compulsory education for all children until sriey
complete the age of fourteen years”.

The expression ‘State’ which occurs in this Article .

is defined in Article 12 to include “The Government
and Parliament of India and the Government and the
Legislature of each of the States and all local
authorities within the territory of India or under the
control of Government of India.”

Article 46 : Promotion of Educational and
Economic Interests of Weaker Sections of Society

This article states : “The state shall promote with

Indian Cbnstitutional Values and Education 87
Dee
special care the jeducational and economic interests
of the weaker|sections of the people, and in
particular, of the Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduled Tribes and shall protect them from social

injustice and all forms of exploitation”.

It could be noted that no one could approach
the court for the enforcement of those articles
mentioned in the fourth schedule.

; Article 45 of the Directive Principles has been
included as Article 21A of the Constitution as one
of the Fundamental Rights — Right to Education -
as per the 86" Amendment to the Constitution.

_ Similarly, Articles 28, 29 and 30 which relate to
educational rights of minorities have been included
as one of the. Fundamental Rights.

Thus, all provisions that find place in the Directive
Principles with regard to Education, have now gained

full legal status.

3:04:2:01 Provisions Safeguarding the
Educational Rights of Minorities

‘Article 28 : Freedom as to Attendance at
Religious Instruction or Religious Worship in
Educational Institutions

spees

"

“ay

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 50
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 50
titiee

Lye

a)

— 7

a
SEES KSHU OO BDEGBOBCBG

}

— ed oy oy Ly

ht

~APRAADAAHDAHAHAONNM

88 Contemporary India and Education
ne

Clause (1) No religious instruction shall be
provided in any educational institution
wholly maintained out.of State funds.

Clause (2) » Nothing in Clause (1) shall apply to an
educational institution which’ is
administered by the State but has
been established.: under’ any
endowment or trust which requires
that’ religious instruction shall be
imparted in such institution.

3.No person attending any educational
institution recognised by the State or receiving aid
out of State funds shall be required to take part or to
attend any religious worship that may be conducted
in such institution or in any premises attached thereto
‘unless such person or, if such a person is.a minor,
his guardian has given consent thereto. ,
Article 29, Clause (2) : Right (of Admission in
Educational Institution
No citizen shall be denied admission into
educational institution maintained by the State or
receiving aid out of State funds an grounds only of
religion, race, caste, language orlany of them.

Indian Constitutional Values and Education 89

Article 30 Right of Minorities to Establish and
Administer Educational Institutions

Clause (1) All minorities; whether based on
religion or language, shall have the
right to establish and administer
educational institutions of their choice.

“Clause (2) The State shall not, in granting aid to

educational institutions, discriminate
against any educational institution on
the ground that it is under the
management of a minority, whether
based on religion or language.

3:05 Challenges Faced in Fulfilling the
Constitutional Obligations

The Indian Constitution came into effect on 26"
January 1950. Parliament, Executive (State) and
Judiciary are bound to function in accordance with
the provisions of the Constitution.

N

In England, there is no written constitution: [In
U.S.A., the elected President is all powerful. Soviet
Russia was a Union of several States. In India, the
Prime Minister, elected by the Indian Parliament, is
the head of the administration. The President of India
is a dignified head with special Constitutional powers.

a

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 51
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 51
90 - Contemporary India and Education

The Indian Constitution presently ‘contains 25
Appencices with 448 Articles and 12 Schedules. It
is a lengthy Constitution in the world.

Keeping in mind the plurality of India, the
Constitution: Drafting Committee headed by
Dr. B.R. Ambedkar drafted a flexible Constitution.
This draft Constitution was accepted by the
Constituent Assembly after long deliberations.

Indian Constitution was amended. 105 times in
the past 72 years to fulfill the emerging needs of our
people.

The challenges faced by the Indian Constitution are:

3:05:1 Freedom

Article 19 of the Constitution guarantees the

following 6 freedoms as fundamental rights. They
are:

i) Freedom of speech and expression

ii) Freedom to assemble peacefully without arms

Freedom to form associations or unions

iv) Freedom to move freely throughout the territory
of India

Indian Cohstitutional Values and Education 91

v) Freedom to reside and settle in any part of
Indian territory

vi) Freedom to practise any profession or to carry
on any occupation, trade and commerce

State governments frequently interfere in the
freedom of speech and expression. Cases are foisted
against those who criticize the government. The
media do not realize that it is unethical to publish
baseless and sensational news and pictures. People
also do not realize that their right of speech and
expression is notian absolute right and that it should
not harm others and also not to be anti-national.
People, in general, irrespective.of whether they are
educated or: ordinary persons, behave-with
selfishness and greed. We can see in everyday life,
the tendency among some people of doing anything

they like under the guise of freedom and the

suppressing the oppressed. People Should be made
aware of the nature and extent of their freedom,
through education. -

3:05:2
The poor and ordinary people find it difficult to

approach the courts and get their grievances
redressed. There is also inordinate delay in getting

Justice

é

oan

ee oeseasne spy

a i

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 52
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 52
©

_or language. opt

92 Contemporary India and Education

is
justice. The reason for this is, the financial condition
of the government does not permit to have courts in
Proportion to the population of the country. Further,
the number of judges serving in courts is also
inadequate. Nearly 50% of the posts of judges are
lying vacant, since the posts of retiring judges are
not being filled up then and there. Because of this,
there are several thousands of cases pending in
courts for years together for a very long time. But
the cases filed by influential people get priority. It
should be remembered that “justice delayed is justice
denied”. '
3:05:3

Equality

All are equal before law. According to Article 14
of the Indian Constitution, there should not be any
discrimination on the basis of religion, caste, gender

However, still there are gender discrimination in
India. In spite of infanticide being prevented to a great
extent and enacting several lawsjto curb atrocities
against women, molestation of women and honour
killing (due to matrimonial relationship with those in
low castes) continues unabated. The discrimination

Indian Constitutional Values and Education 93

between men and women in employment, salary,
promotion etc. still continues.

The conservatives and religious leaders hamper
the efforts of the. government to bring in changes in
a big way in the places of worship and social
traditions such as marriage and divorce.
Untouchability is not eradicated from the society in
spite of enacting several laws against untouchability.

‘Untouchability is emerging in several forms.

'3:05:4

Fraternity

Indian society is divided by religion, language,
castes and economic disparities. Divisive forces are
gaining strength. As national leaders with broad
vision and selflessness have become rare, people
could not be separated from those divisive
forces. Even small violent acts here and there are

coloured with caste, religion and language, leading

to riots.

All of us are Indians; if only India lives, all of us
can live; if India falls, all of us will fall together. As
this ‘we’ feeling is less among people, development
of Fraternity is affected and it needs to be
strengthened.
