======================================================================
UNIT III - EDUCATIONAL DEMANDS OF INDIVIDUALS AND DIVERSE COMMUNITIES
Content: Educational Demands of Individuals and Diverse Communities
Pages: 88 - 108
======================================================================


──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 88
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 88
164 . Contemporary India and Education

aed ae

10. What is the meaning of ‘Inter-disciplinary’?
[Ans: 4:07:1]

11. Briefly explain the Inter-disciplinary nature of
education with philosophy, psychology,

sociology, anthropology, politics and history. (A)
[Ans: 4:07:1-+ 4:07:1:01 to the end of 4:07:1:07]

UNIT - Ill
LESSON - 5

EDUCATIONAL DEMANDS OF INDIVIDUAL
AND DIVERSE COMMUNITIES

5:00 Introduction

As Indian society consists of diverse
communities, the educational needs of individuals
as well as that of different social groups differ. It is
the duty of the government in democratic countries
to provide basic education for all children. The poor,
oppressed and marginalized people find it impossible
to send their children to school as they struggle to
get even a square meal a day. Children who drop
out from school without completing their primary
education are considerable in number. Furthermore
children with disabilities are unable ta.go to common
school and learn. It is the duty of the government to
fulfill the basic educational needs of such people.
The Central and State governments, keeping in mind
the diverse educational needs of various social
groups in the society, are implementing various
schemes with keen interest. Notable among them
are i) Sarva Siksha Abhiyan (S.S.A), Rashtriya

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 89
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 89
166 Contemporary India and Education

Madhyamic Siksha Abhiyan (R.M.S.A), Rashtriya
Uchchatar Siksha Abhiyan (R.U.S.A.), Integrated
Education and Inclusive Education. The main features
of each one of these schemes viz. objectives, method
of functioning and the financial resources are to be
discussed in this unit. The challenges in providing
basic education for all, education for collective and
peaceful living [(i.e.) the four fundamental aims of
education, known as the Four Pillars of Education]
are also to be taken up for discussion in this unit.

5:01 Universalisation of Primary
Education

5:01:1 Meaning of “Universal Primary
Education”

Article 45 of the Indian Constitution states, “It is
the endeavour of the State to provide free and
compulsory education to all children from age 6 to
‘14 and this should be realised within 10 years from
the commencement of the Constitution.”

This constitutional directive of providing universal”

primary education implies the following :

i) Primary education of 8 years should be made
free to all children. ,

ii) All 5 year old children should be compulsorily
enrolled in Class | of primary schools.

dividual 167
tional Demands of In
— a Diverse Communities

iii) Primary education should be made compulsory;
all children of age 6 to 14 should go to

school.

iv) Children admitted in Class | should be retained
in schools till they complete Class VIII.

Hence, Universalisation of Primary / elementary
education is considered as the duty of the Central
and State governments as laid down in the Indian

‘
Constitution.

5:01:2 Challenges in Achieving
Universal Primary Education

The goal af achieving universal primary
education as dijected by. the Indian Constitution,
which came into being in 1950, was set first as1960;
as it could not be achieved due to various reasons,
it was modified successively as 1970, 1976, 1988,
1990, 1995, 2000 etc. At present, efforts are
continued to achieve the target of providing universal
primary education through mata Siksha Abhiyan
scheme.

‘Following are tie reasons for not able to achieve

the goal of ‘providing universal primary education’
fully, even today.

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 90
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 90
6

168 Contemporary India and Education
er

’

1. Economic Factors

Due to utter poverty particularly in the rural areas,
young children are forced to take up petty jobs as
domestic servants or menials to augment their family
income. When ‘Rajasthan government directed for
the strict implementation of its legislation by
imprisoning those parents who fail to send to schools
their children of school-going age (viz. 6 to 14 years),
many parents preferred to go to jail rather than
sending their children to schools. The main reason
for this sad phenomenon ig the acute poverty
cornering many a rural Family Ultimately the State
government had to withdraw the penal HOOWISIONS of
the legislation.

2. Ignorance of Parents

Uneducated parents. do not realise the
importance of education and hence they do not care
to send their children to school. Parents’ ignorance
is reported as the main obstacle in getting children
admitted in primary schools.

3. Communal and Ethnic Barriers

; Some of the tribal people and ethnic groups like
‘Narikoravas’ do not show any interest in getting their
children educated. Religious minorities particularly

Educational Demands of Individual 169
and Diverse Communities

the Muslims, Backward Class and Most backward
class, Tribal and denotified communities do not
evince much interest in education. Children of these
communities do not join the schools; instead prefer
either to take up jobs or enter into the family business
/ occupation.

4. Obstacles Due to Social and Religious
Practices

Some sections of Hindu society do not allow the
girls to attend schools once they attain puberty.
Muslims do not care to send girls to schools.

5. Geographical Locale as’a Barrier

The localities where pupils reside, also prove to
be a barrier to get access to primary education.
Children hailing from hilly areas, drought prone
regions and remote rural villages do not attend
schools as most often no school is available in those
areas. When pupils are forced to travel a long
distance to attend a school, they get discouraged.

6. Educational Reasons

‘Wastage’ and ‘Stagnation’ are the twin problems
plaguing primary education. Further, school
education appears to be uninteresting and divorced °'
from practical life; pupils do not get attracted towards
schools.

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 91
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 91
170 * Contemporary India and Education

7. Paucity of Funds

Most of the State Governments in India suffer
from paucity of funds to allocate for opening new
schools in good number in rural areas and provide
the necessary infrastructure to make them functional.
It is really sad to note that the governments, both at
the State and Centre do not provide more than 3%
of their budget allocations to expand and enrich
primary schools.
8. Administrative Lapses

Pupils stop their education due to disfunctional
schools and schools which do not provide for proper
education. Private schools thrive mainly because of
bad administration and management of government
schools.

9. Individual Related Problems

Mentally challenged pupils, pupils with emotional
disturbances and severe behavioural problems could
not get along in normal schools and hence have to
stop their education.

10. Population Explosion
This is the root cause of all other problems.

According to the 1971 census, there are about 11.7
crore children in the age group 6 to 14 years and

Educational Demands of Individual

and Diverse Communities 171

to rise to 36 crores by 2021.
h a situation, the teacher-strength is to be

s for which a huge financial resource
|

this figure is expected

In suc
raised to 58 lakh

is required. AS the governments struggle to meet
such a mammoth financial burden, expansion of

primary education commensurate to the population

explosion seems to be beyond our reach. .

lf we analyze the above mentioned reasons, it
will be clear that it is not practically possible to
achieve the goal of providing universal primary

education through formal system of education alone.
Hence non-formal system of education shoule be
given due importance and implemented throughout
the country.

5:01:3, Efforts Taken. to Provide
Universal Primary Education

1. Expansion in’ Primary Education

In 1947, at the time of independence, there were
only 173 thousand primary schools in India. But it
has increased-to about 500 thousand schools in

1990-91, and 840 thousand in 2015. Similarly there
has also, beena significant increase in the number of
middle schools. In: Tamilnadu, schools are opened in

small hamlets withi a population of 300 people.

‘

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 92
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 92
172 Contemporary India and Education i
— .

2. Enrollment of Pupils

Number of pupils enrolled in primary schools has
multiplied in manifold as pompated to that at the time

of independence.

3. Useful Curriculum and Interesting Methods of
Teaching |

Today emphasis has been given in the curriculum
to include all those meaningful experiences of
children which are related to their immediate needs
and living conditions. For example, present day
school curriculum provides importance for
environmental education, population education,
vocational education, value education etc. and tries
to impart education through the mother tongue.
Teaching methods are also made interesting. For
example in Tamilnadu Primary schools, ‘Activity
Based Learning Method’ is employed in teaching.

4. Special Focus on Education of the Children
from the Weaker Sections of the Society

Article 46 of the Indian constitution stresses that
appropriate efforts should be taken for the
educational progress and economic development of
the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. As per.
this constitutional directive, children belonging'to the

Educational Demands of Individual 173
and Diverse Communities

weaker sections of the society are provided with
liberal grant of scholarship, financial assistance, free

‘text books and dress materials for school uniform,

free stay and boarding in hostels etc. in order to
motivate them to get educated and advance

economically.
5. Student Welfare Schemes

Free nutritious noon-meal scheme, free
transport, free text books, stationeries and uniforms
and free medical facilities are provided to the
students.

6. Priority to Girls’ Education

Campaigns are being conducted emphasizing
girls’ education

7. Higher Financial Allocation

Governments both at the Centre and State make
significant financial allocations in their annual
budgets and of these about 48.5% is spent on
primary education. In addition to this, private
agencies too spend huge amounts on education.

8. Some of the New Schemes Attempted under
the New Education Policy

The New Education Policy notified in 1986

é

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 93
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 93
174 Contemporary India and Education

recommended some new initiatives to make the
scheme “Providing Universal Primary Education”
successful. They are:

i) Operation Black Board

ii) Sarva Siksha Abhiyan (S.S.A.) Scheme is being
implemented to benefit 20.5. crore people
covering 11 lakhs villages

iii) Ensuring minimum levels of learning by
undertaking child-centered teaching methods
(like ‘Activity Based Learning’).

iv) Revising school working days and holidays to
suit the needs of students in the rural areas.

v) Establishing District Institutes of Education
(DIET) in each district to improve the standard
of education in primary schools.

vi) Making examinations more objective and
ensuring that there is no retention of pupils in
the same class in primary education from | Std.
to V Std.

vii) Implementing non-formal education schemes

like CAPE for primary school dropouts, for those

who do not have schools nearby and for the

working children.

Individual 175
Educational Demands nunities

— . ~ and Diverse

viii) Making primary education flexible enough to
allow children who study well through non-
formal education system to switch over to formal

education system, if they desire.

As part of the scheme of providing primary
education for all, Sarva Siksha Abhiyan Scheme is
being vigorously, implemented to provide education
to children such as those who had not been to school
so far, children who dropped out of school without
completing primary education and those who work
as child labourers. As this scheme has proved to be

_successful, the next stages of this scheme viz. RMSA
“and RUSA sehemmes are being undertaken now.

5:02 Sarva Siksha Abhiyan (SSA)

The English equivalence of S.S.A is “The
Education for All Movement”, which is sometimes
referred to as ‘each one teach one’. Itis a flagship
programme of India, launched during the Nineth Five
Year Plan (1997-2002), for achieving Universalisation
of Elementary Education (UEE) ina time ‘bound
manner, as mandated by the 86th amendment to the
constitution of India, making free and compulsory
education to children of ages 6 to 14 (estimated to
bé 306 millions in 2021) a fundamental right.

22 ii

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 94
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 94
176 Contemporary India and Education

This scheme is executed by the Government of
India with the full cooperation of the State
Governments in 11 lakh villages for the benefit of
20.5 crore children in the country. In Tamilnadu this
scheme is executed under the head and direct
supervision of an LA.S. Officer.

5:02:1 Aims of SSA. |

i) To achieve the goal of universalisation of
elementary education of satisfactory quality by
2010.

ii) To bridge social, regional and gender gaps, with
the active participation of the community in the
management of schools.

5:02:1:01 Objectives of SSA

\A Admitting all children in| school, Education
Guarantee Centre or Alternate School by 2003.

4 Ensuring that all children complete five years
of primary schooling by 2007.

4 Ensuring that all children complete eight years
of schooling by 2010.

4 Focussing on providing elementary education
of satisfactory quality with emphasis on education
for life.

Educational Demands of Individual 177
and Diverse Communities

4 Bridging gaps between gender and among the

social categories at primary education stage
by 2007 and at elementary education level by
2010.

4 Practising universal retention by 2010.
5:02:2 Operational Strategies of SSA

Opening new schools in those habitations which
do not have school facilities.

Providing ‘School Improvement Grants’ to
strengthen the existing school infrastructure
through provision of additional classrooms,
toilets and drinking water facilities.

Providing additional teachers to existing schools
with inadequate strength of teachers.

Enhancing the capacity of the primary school
teachers through extensive in-service
programmes; providing liberal grants for
developing teaching-learning materials.

Strengthening of academic support structure at
cluster, block and district level.

Ensuring to provide quality elementary
education including life-skills.

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 95
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 95
5:02:3

178 Contemporary India and Education

I

— Providing special focus on girls’ education and
children with special needs.

~ Providing basic computer literacy to students.

Funding for SSA Peoject

A The assistance under the programme of Sarva
Siksha Abhiyan is on a 85:15 sharing
arrangement during the IX Plan, 75:25 sharing
arrangement during the X Plan, and 50:50
sharing thereafter between the Central
government and State governments.

4 The State Governments will have to maintain
their level of investment in elementary

education as in 1999-2000. The contribution as.

State share for SSA will be over and above this
investment.

& The Government of India would release funds
directly to the State Implementation Society.
The further instalments would be released to

the Society only after the State government has.

transferred its matching share to the society
and expenditure of at least 50% of the funds
(Centre and States) transferred has been
incurred.

Educational Demands of Individual 179

=~ and Diverse Communities

A Existing scheme

s of elementary education of

the Department (except Mahila Samakhya,

National Bal Bhawan and NCTE) will converge

into SSA after the IX Plan. The National

Programme for Nutritional Support to Primary
|

Education ae ion. Meal) would remain a
|

distinct intervention.

District Education Plans would inter—alia, clearly
show the’ funds/resources available for various
componente under schemes like PMGY, JGSY,
PMRY, Sunishchit Rozgar Yojana, Area fund of
MPs/MLAs, State Plan, foreign funding (if any)
and resources generated in the NGO sector.

All: funds to ‘be used for upgradation, mainte-
nance, repair of schools and Teaching Learning
Equipment and local management to be
transferred ‘to ‘Village Education Committees/
School Management Committees/ Gram
Panchayat/ or any other village/ school level
arrangement for decentralisation, adopted by

‘that particular State/UT. The village/ school-

* “based body.may make a resolution regarding

ci-13

the best way. of procurement.

Other incentive schemes like distribution of

6

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 96
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 96
"e

%

180 Contemporary India and Education

_Scholarships and uniform will continue to be
funded under the State Plan. They will not be
funded under the SSA programme.

5:03 Rashtriya Madhyamik Siksha
Abhiyan (RMSA)

This scheme, briefly refered as RMSA was
designed to admit all eligible children in secondary
schools and also improve the quality of secondary
education. !

Vision for Secondary Education

~ to provide quality secondary education to all the
youth in the age group 14 to 18.

+ to make sécondary education easily accessible.
4 to make secondary education economical.

To achieve the above|mentioned vision
statement, the following steps should be taken.

+ There should be a secondary school within: a
radius of 5 kilometres and a higher secondary
school within 7 to 10 kilometres of every

habitation.

+ 100% Enrolment of this age group (14 to 18)
should be achieved before 2017.

Educational Demands of Individual 181

and Diverse Communities __
+ By the year 2020, all those who joined secondary

schools should complete the course. There
should be no dropouts.

+ More opportunities for the undermentioned
sections of society to join and complete the
secondary education course

- Economically weaker sections
- Girls F

Handicapped Children living in rural areas.

Marginalised sections of the society

Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, other

backward classes and educationally

- backward minority communities.

+ RMSA covers Stds VI to'XIl.

5:03:1 Goals and Objectives of RMSA

5:03:1:01 Goals >
Secondary Education should have a new
design to provide quality education to all youths in
the age group 14 to 18. For this purpose several
guidelines are suggested.
4 Easy access to secondary education to all

eligible persons.

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 97
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 97
182 Contemporary India and Education

A Equality and social justice.

4 Making secondary education to suit the
changing times and to be in tune with the
developmental needs and over all structure of
education:

A Encouraging Common School System to
achieve the goals of equity. (Same schools for
all children - rich or poor).

4 To assure that all the youth, particularly the
underprivileged and people living below poverty
line, get secondary education.

5:03:1:02 Objectives

@ All secondary schools should have the
prescribed school places, with adequate
infrastructure, material resources, and other
facilities. In the case of government schools,
municipal schools and aided schools, the
additional expenditure should be borne by the
government. Suitable controlling mechanism
should be devised to ensure that private

(unaided) schools also have all the prescribed:

facilities.

@ Establishing residential schools in tribal areas.

ds of Individual 183
Educational Dee Communities

a
© School management should provide efficient
t system for the benefit of staff and

transpor
students.

@ No child shbuld be deprived of secondary

education because of gender, socio-economic

factors, physical handicap or other such reasons.

@ The above mentioned objectives will indicate the
progress towards a common school system.

5:04 Rashtriya Uchachatar Siksha
Abhiyan (RUSA) -

For Universalisation of secondary education,
Sarva Shiksha Abhivan was launched in 1997, and
is being: implemented with full vigour in all primary
schools throughout India.

_ For the next stage (i.e.) Secondary School Stage,
the aim was to make it available to all children who.
complete the primary stage. To achieve this laudable
aim, a new scheme called RMSA (Rashtriya
Madhyamik Siksha Abhiyan 2009) was launched and

~ carried out.

_ As anatural development, higher education also
calls for attention. A new plan.called RUSA (Rashtriya
Uchchatar Siksha Abhiyan 2013) was planned by the

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 98
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 98
184 Contemporary India and Education
a
Ministry of Human Resources and Development and
is being implemented. 4

Under this plan, a new central organisation will
be created:to suggest introduction of reforms in
higher education, help in planning, supervising
developmental schemes of all State administered
universities. RUSA will provide help towards greater
autonomy for State Universities and also introduce
examination reforms. os
Other salient functions of RUSA |

i) Upgrading selected universities to achieve
international standard.

ii) Permitting the opening of new universities.

ii) Linking colleges in the neighbourhood of a
university as its cluster colleges.

iv) Upgrading full fledged degree colleges into
model colleges.

v) Creatring State Councils of Higher Education.

vi) Funnelling Central aid:to universities and
colleges through these State Councils and not

through U.G.C.

Educational Demands of Individual 185
and Diverse Communities

_ vii) 90% of the new expenditure will be borne by

the Central Government and only 10% by State
Governments.

viii) Even private (unaided) colleges and universities
can get funds, subject to certain conditions.

Ministry of Human Resource Development
expects that in the next seven years, the number of
those who get higher education in our country will

“increase substantially and the Gross Enrolment

Rate (GER) will increase through the implementation
of RUSA, from 18% to 25.2% by the end of 12" plan
and to 32% by the end of 13" plan. For the schemes
in higher education including the present higher |
education institutions, the total expenditure is
estimated to be Rs.99,000 crores. .

5:05 Integrated Education
5:05:1 Concept of Integrated Education

Educating children with special needs as well
as those with different kinds of disabilities, in the
mainstream settings of the common schools, along

‘with normal children is known as ‘Integrated

Education’.

The concept of integrated education arose as

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 99
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 99
186 Contemporary India and Education
eee

an outcome of the National Policy on Education
(1986), which recommended to provide equal
Opportunity in education for all, not only for access
but also complete development. Integration in
education refers to providing for interactions of
disabled children with normal children in the same
school educational setting. In other words,

‘Integration in education’ means ‘mainstreaming’ or
‘normalization’.

5:05:2 Implementing
Education

Integrated

Children with less amount of disability could be
educated in the Common School classes along with
normal children by providing some specialized
educational help and services. Depending upon the
extent of disability, exceptional children can attend
classes with normal children either on a part time or
full time basis. The following two strategies could be
employed to educate exceptional children in ordinary
schools with normal children.

Strategy 1

Making exceptional children to learn in the
regular classroom along with normal children,
following the normal curriculum, on a full time basis

‘in Braille for

dual 187
mands of Indivi
Eduoatlont erae Communities

SO
by providing the required special help like making
available audio alds for the hearing impaired, books

the visually impaired children etc.

Stratefy 2

Children with| moderate level of disability can be
made to attend classes with normal children for half
a day and in the other half a day learn in the special
education room with the help of a special education
teacher. These children could also be made to
participate in all ‘co-curricular activities along with

normal children. .

The special education room situated in the
common school campus will have all the materials
and equipments as well as the facilities required for
providing special education, apart from the services
of fully trained and experienced special education

teacher. ee

“Thus, integrated education is the educational
programme in which exceptional children attend
classes with normal children either on a part time or
full time basis. It is the placement of the disabled
children in ordinary schools with some specialized
educational help and services.

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 100
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 100
188 Contemporary India and Education

i
5:06 Inclusive Education ~

5:06:1 Meaning of Inclusive Education

Inclusive Education means that all students
attend and are welcomed by .their neighbourhood
schools in agé& appropriate, regular classes and are
supported to learn, participate and contribute in all
aspects of the life of the, school; . inclusive
education is about how we develop and design our
schools, classrooms, programmes and activities so
that all types of students. learn and participate
together.

Under inclusive educatién, students with special
needs spend most or all of their time with non-
disabled students. Inclusion rejects the use of special
schools or classrooms to separate students with
disabilities from students without disabilities.

Stated briefly, in inclusive education disabled
children are treated with normal children; it includes
all the students who are away from education for
one reason or other like physically or mentally
challenged, economically or socially deprived or
belonging to any caste, creed and gender.

Educational Demands of Individual 189
and Diverse Communities

5:06:2. Definition of Inclusive Education

According to UNESCO, “Inclusion is a process
of addressing and responding to the diversity of
needs of all learners through increasing participation
in learning, cultures and communities, and reducing
exclusion within and from education.

It involves changes and modifications in content,
approaches, structures and strategies, with a
common vision which covers all children of the

appropriate age range and a conviction that it is the

responsibility of the regular system to educate all
children”.

5:06:3. Difference Between ‘Education
for All’ and ‘Inclusive Education”

The Indian government took the word “ALL” in
“Education for All” to mean as normal children with
average intelligence and made efforts till 1990 to
achieve the goal of 100% literacy by admitting those
students in the age group of 6 to 14 in the public
schools. However even that goal too could not be
achieved fully even today.

UNESCO sponsored Conference organised by
‘World Education Forum’ in Dakar, Senegal in 2000

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 101
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 101
a of
390
o 82 wy
60 2s m=
=~ 2 » Oo
yg = =e =
> ~~ @ 8
oF 2a 0 =
» => Oo
g5 5 sy
> - Oo
2032 6
oT a0 0
oc =
° o
2 o> . w
= 35 o
en &
o> WD ¢€
Ss &
< a
ay
=a 6
gc
2 90
> »
an
3
oF
pa ers
ao oO
oO
a3
<
°o°6
3 o>

- UOHEONPS @plAod 0} sjooyos oIjqnd Hulysiqeisy ‘p

6
L

“AUIGeSIP 1194} UO

peseq sjOOYos ]UdJOJJIP O} Wey} Bulpues jou ~
“sAem BulMmo}]|O} 94} Ul POO}suapuN

“uoleonpea jo panlidap 10 peziyeulBsew ase OUM

sjuapnjs jo saoBeyeo |e 10} UIadUOD Hulmous ‘¢

pure jooyos je19uab ul S}JUspNys Jo salObeyeo

We Buyepowwoose sueew uolsnjou;
“SJUEPNIS Palqesip 10} UI9DUOD ue aleD -

SI ,AAISN|OU], POM BY} UOeONpy aaisnjou; u|

“uonepsejas

[B}UEW Bulpnjou! sanijiqesip ym UeIp|Iyo pue ‘Sqiy /
AIH ‘Jem pur joljjuoo Aq payseyje uaip]!yo ‘saquoUl

JBAN}IND pue diuyja ‘onsinBul; Wo uaipyiyo ‘spewou
PUB SI9||BMP |eins e]OWS! JO UdIPIIYO ‘udipjiyo
Bulyiom pue UdIP|I4YO Jee1j3s Huipnjou ‘psheyueape
“SIP JSOW OY} pue 1OOd day} JO SpeeuU Sy} JUNODDe
oyu! Oye} ISN ||\¥ 104 UOHeONpy, Jey} Papuawiwodes

5:06:4 | Comparison Between ‘Inclusive Education’ and Integrated
Education’

Place of study for

the disabled

Regular classroom in the public schoo!

Regular classroom in the public school

|+ special education classroom in the

school campus

Duration of study with During all the class hours

normal children by the
disabled children

Duration of study in |Besides attending regular classes, the

special school
setting

disabled can also get special education
in the’school campus itself through the
itinary teacher, outside the class hours.

The regular class teachers having skills

in teaching general subjects + basic skills
in special education.

During all the class hours

i) Exceptional children learning in the
regular classroom along with normal
children on a full time basis with
special help. (OR)

ii) Halfa day in the regular classroom with
normal students and half a day in
special education classroom located
in the same school Campus.

O61

uojeonpy pue ejpuy Asesodwayuog

wo essenid Puc!

sojyunw

yenpjAipul 4

spueweg jeuopyeonps

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 102
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 102
Educational Demands of Individual 193
nd Diverse Communities

and Diverse Communttes
5:07 Education for Collective Living
and Peaceful Living

Shakespeare states ‘We know that what we are,
but know not what we may be’. Today Indian Society
‘ needs reconstruction. This can be accomplished only
through education. To achieve this, we are to transmit
the best of Indian culture to younger generation by
linking it with western knowledge. Teachers can
develop forward looking outlook among students.
That is, teacher should do the needful that students
get education that develops skills for self learning,
which are useful throughout one’s life, skills that are
_required to do different vocations efficiently, skills that
help to find unity in diversity, skills that help to settle
disputes throrigh negotiations and discussions
(problem solving) and above all, education should
help students to develop their whole personality. For
this purpose, the teachers must develop in
themselves wholesome ‘Occupational personality’
which is liberal in “outlook and progressive in its
beliefs and ideas”.

192 Contemporary Indla and Education
—eeeeeeeSeF

Integrated
Education

will have training,and skills in special

education.

Those who work in-the special schools

significantly improve.

Education

Inclusive

space for moving the wheel chair, | Public school regular classroom and
teaching aids for-the disabled etc.) will | Most of the facilities required for disabled
Achievement in curriculum subjects to | Though achievement is less in curricular

Basic facilities (special seats, enough | Basic facilities for the disabled in the
certain extent + good improvement.in| Subjects, their social skills will

have training and skills in special | basic skills in special education

education.
the public school

The special education teacher who visits | The regular class teachers will be having
social skills

the school outside the school hours will | skills in teaching general subjects besides

The three major issues that are confronting us
in the 21% century are (i) War and Peace, (ii) Man
and Environment and (iii) Culture and Technology.
Along with population explosion and knowledge

Comparison

Teacher's skills

Special facilities
for the disabled
disabled students

Component of
Achievement of

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 103
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 103
195

ands of Individual

Educational Demaymmunities

194 Contemporary Indla and Education ‘and Diverse

talents to the full and to realize our creative potential,

ibili i and
including responsibility for our own lives
personal aims, besides developing

collective and peaceful living”. Four

explosion, our expectations too increasing day by
day. Because of all these things, we are besieged
with tension in all fronts. Under these circumstances,
the education that helps the present day students to
live together in the future society, with peace and
harmony is essential. In other words, together with
developing subject knowledge and practical skills,
it also becomes essential to provide Value
Education. The Committee headed by Jacques
Delors (1996) emphasize the need for ‘Value

achievement of

the capacity for
pillars of Education as recommended by the Delor’s

Commission are:

1. Learning to ‘Know’

2.1 Learning to ‘Do’
3.’ Learning to ‘Live together’
4

.| Learning to ‘Be’

Education’ in its report titled “Learning: The
Treasure Within” submitted to the UNESCO. In this
connection, the values to be developed among

Learning to.‘Know’ Learning to ‘Do’
students are: i) Non-violence ii) Cooperation vere
iii) Selfless attitude iv) Respecting others and treating

them with respect v) Accepting the differences among

Four Pillars of

F ion
men and focussing on the common elements Educat 7

Learning to ‘Be’

vi) Realizing the necessity for everyone to depend

Learning to
on others.

‘Live together’
5:08 Four Pillars of Education as Viwed
by Delor’s Commission Report

Now let use discuss briefly each one of them.

Delor Commission Report (1996) states that
“education is at the heart of both personal and 5:08:1 Concept of Learning to Know
community development; its mission is to enable

: Learning to know refers to ‘learning how to learn’.
each of us, without exception, to develop: all our :

cl-14

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 104
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 104
ee

t denotes one’s concentration, memory skills and
ability to think.

Every individual has hidden talents such as
i) Memory ii) Reasoning iii) Imagination iv) Physical
ability v) Aesthetic sense and vi) Aptitude to
communicate. ~-._

From infancy, young people must learn how to
concentrate on objects and other people. This
Process of improving concentration skills can
take different forms and aided by many. different
learning opportunities that arise in the course of
people's lives (games, work experience programmes,
travel, practical science activities etc.).

The development of Memory skills is an
excellent tool for countering ihe overpowering stream
- of instant information put out by media. It would be
dangerous to conclude that there is no point in people
improving their memory skills b scause ofthe vast
amount of information storage’ and distribution
Capacity available. Some selecti ity is undoubtedly
required when choosing facts tp be “learned by
heart”. There are numerous ex mples of human
memory’s ability: to outperform ‘noes when it
comes to establishing connections between

; 1

ae ——
Cducational Gemands of Indiviaual 1S7
and Diverse Communities

memorized facts that have very little to do with each
other. Hence it is necessary to develop among
students the skill of learning with association and
memorizing them. It is wrong to discontinue the
traditional memorization exercises in school.
Adopting learning -with understanding and
associating what are learnt, the skill of retaining

information in mind could be improved.

Thinking is something children learn first from
their parents and then from their teachers. The
teacher should help students to learn to encompass
both practical problem-solving and abstract thought.
The teacher should use both ‘Inductive reasoning’
and ‘Deductive reasoning’ in his classroom

teaching.

Stated briefly, through various subject matter,
library work, play activities and co-curricular activities
and by giving importance to inductive And deductive
reasoning, scientific method of solving problems and
laboratory work, _ self learning ability could be
developed among students.

‘Knowing’ means acquiring knowledge by
gathering information about things and organisms
including human beings and events. ‘Learning to

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 105
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 105
198 Contemporary Indla and Education

a

al Demands of Individual 199

iverse Communities

ersonal skills. Besides
ke communica-

tlon
nd D

Know’ means, besides knowing, finding ways and
means of making the knowledge obtained as right
and compete as expected i.e. learning to learn. In
other words when trying to learn something, planning

often referred to) as inter-p

subject knowledge, other qualities |i . si
4 problem solving, taking decisions

ns, establishing rapport with others
al skills or soft skills) are
vice sector.

tion, team building
through discussio
(these are called soci
essential today to serve in the ser

the approaches to be undertaken in it, continuously
monitoring meaningful learning, after completing the
learning activity, evaluating how far the desired goal

is achieved are all included in ‘Learning to know’ skills like:

Personal competence includes
i

Summing up, Learning to Know denotes the

1. Social behaviour
ability to get the knowledge and information 1

2. Personal initiative

needed to work in a globalized, information 4 i fake rake

sho e
society and knowledge economy, and develop the. 5. Mg SSS: fo 7
cognitive skills required for learning ‘how to 4. Communication skills
learn’ and to independently acquire knowledge. 5. Problem:solving skill
As a result of such learning, the person is ; se fee, tent

; 6. Skill of adaptability
transformed as more enlightened, more empowered.
and more enriched. ; 7. Social responsibility
5:08:2 Learning to Do 8. Leadership skills ~
“Learning to do’ refers to putting the knowledge 9. Establishing rapport with others or interested

‘earned into practice. Competency is necessary to use to move with others amicably
the acquired knowledge in proper ways. One’s 10. Life skills

competency is assessed by looking at a mix of
various skills and talents, social behaviour, self
initiative, willingness to work hard etc. These are

11. Skills and attitudes required to function as a group

Stated briefly, the second important function of
education is to develop in students, the ability to use

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 106
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 106
200 Contemporary India and Education
oS
the knowledge acquired properly, to function as a group,
the ability to take decisions after deep deliberation
and steadfast in implementing the decisions taken,
leadership qualities and problem solving skills.

5:08:3 Learning to Live Together

‘Learning to live together’ in peace and harmony
is a dynamic and holistic process. of learning and
internalising social values and practising them
throughout life. That is, the basic need for living in
harmony with others is learning! land practising i in life
the social skills and values like (i) having respect
and concern for others ii) realising the .need and
importance for unity and friendship among people
who differ in several ways based on race, caste,
religion, language, sex, culture etc. . fii) getting along
with others smoothly etc. Fot faaltng students to
learn this, the under mentioned two complementary
approaches could be followed.

i) In the early childhood, focusing on students
discovering the diversities among people
around them;

ii) From later childhood onwards (i.e. from 10 to
12 years of age) making students to involve

Educational Demands of Individual 201

and Diverse Communities
and Diverse Communities

themselves enthusiastically throughout in their
life, in common community programmes.

Identifying the human diversity
i) Teacher may explain about human diversity
to students.

ii) Instilling in students the awareness that just
like differences there are also similarities
among people and different social groups are

interdependent on each other.

School subjects like geography, history,
foreign languages, literature, history of
religions, citizenship education etc. lend
themselves to teach students the similarities
and differences that exist among human
groups and the interdependency among

human groups. .
Involving students in common projects that
benefit the society

i) Encouraging young students to learn through
collaborative projects.

ii) Teachers and students by involving
themselves in common projects that are
beneficial to the society like renovation of
slum areas, helping senior citizens and

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 107
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 107
202 Contemporary India and Education

te

disadvantaged people on humanitarian
ground, participating in mass literacy
programmes, under-taking social service,
undertaking awareness Programmes to
Propagate prevention of environmental
degradation, and the need for safeguarding
human rights, participating in the movement
for prevention of AIDS and drug abuse,
social concern and responsibility could be
developed among students.

Stated briefly, one can live independently, in
amity and peace with others, only by acquiring social
concern and social skills, besides developing the
ability to search for knowledge through self learning
and use the knowledge thus gained in innovative
Ways. It is not enough to have mere bookish
knowledge or proficiency in skills. Education should
Prepare the students to lead a useful and purposeful
life in the society. Democracy is a way of life. If one
Practises it from his student days, he will, in his later
life become a useful citizen of the society. For this,
the values that are to be learned by the students
are: i). Non-violence ii) Cooperation iii) Selfless
attitude iv) Respecting others and treating them with
respect v) Accepting human diversity and focussing

ands of Individual 203

em
= aatione ine Communitles

mon elements Vi) Understanding the
on com

necessity for interdependence among peeple:
5:08:4 Learning To Be

This raters to the all-round seamen aeabis of the
wholé person. Unlike soap cakes all’ pupIS do not
have the same nature and a iaalaenaes Various
inherent potentials are there in each individual. The
main aim of education is to nurture those potentials
and make every individual a unique personality.
Education shouid help each individual to develop the
body, mind and spirit. Students from their early
childhood should receive education that equips them
to develop their own independent, critical way of
thinking and judgement so that they can make up
their minds on the best courses of action in the
different circumstances in their lives and to be healthy
with a strong physique. x

Stated in brief, the main aim of education is to
help each student to develop his/her inherent talents
and abilities, and develop the body, mind and spirit.
That is education should attempt to make each
individual as a whole person exalting in different
ways.

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 108
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 108
204 Contemporary India and Education
ee

Conclusion

In this unit, the Necessity for fulfilling th:
educational needs of various individuals and groups
in the society, the Concept of ‘Universalisation of
Primary Education’, Challenges in implementing it,
Efforts taken to provide ‘Education for All’, particularly
the salient features of notable schemes like i) Sarva
Siksha Abhiyan (S.S. A), Rashtriya Madhyamic
Siksha Abhiyan (R.M.S. A), Rashtriya Uchchatar
Siksha Abhiyan (R.U.S.A.), Meaning of Integrated

Education and Inclusive Education and the main -

differences between them, Education for collective
and peaceful living [(i.e.) four fundamental aims of
education, known as Four Pillars ‘of of Education] were
discussed elaborately.

Review Questions: ;
| .

1. What do you mean by ‘Universalization of
Primary Education’? OR
What does Article 45 of the Indian Constitution
implies? (C) [Ans: 5:01:41]

Educational Demands of Individual 205

and Diverse Communities
ees

2. Explain why even after 74 years of getting
independence, Provisions of Article 45 of the
Indian Constitution could not be complied with
fully? (A) [Ans: 5:01:1 + 5:01 :2]

3. Describe the efforts taken by the Central and
State governments till now, to provide
“Education for All’. (A) [Ans: 5:01 73]

4. What do you mean by ‘Sarva Siksha Abhiyan’
Scheme? (B) [Ans: 5:02 + 5:02:11]

5. Explain briefly the aims and functions of Sarva
Siksha Abhiyan Scheme.(B) [Ans: 5:02:1:01 +

; 9:02:2]

6. Describe how Sarva Siksha Abhiyan Scheme

is ‘being implemented (A) [Ans: 5:02 + 5:02:1 +
5:02:1:01 + 5:02:2 + 5:02:3]

_ 7. Explain the goals and objectives of Rashtriya

Madhyamic Siksha Abhiyan Scheme. (B)
[Ans: 5:03 + 5:03:1 + 5:03:1:01 + 5:03:1:02]

8. Describe the salient features of Rashtriya
Uchchatar Siksha Abhiyan Scheme. (B)
[Ans: 5:04]

9. What is ‘Integrated Education’? (C)
[Ans: 5:05:1]
