======================================================================
UNIT II - UNDERSTANDING SOCIAL DIVERSITY
Content: Understanding Social Diversity and its Educational Implications
Pages: 53 - 87
======================================================================


──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 53
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 53
94 Contemporary India and Education

3:06
3:06:1

The phrase ‘Social Justice’, has become
mainstream in recent times; but it has existed. for
hundreds of years. Social justice gained more
importance during the 19" century due to the
industrial revolution and civil unrest in Europe when
people started opposing dangerous labour
conditions, exploitation and other unfair systems of
government.

Social Justice and Education
Meaning of ‘Social Justice’

The core concept of ‘Social Justice’ is about the

fair distribution of opportunities and privileges as they:

apply to individuals within a society. While at first
social justice centred mostly on wealth and property,
it now encompasses more areas such as the
environment, race, gender and education.

3:06:2 Education as a Means of Social
Justice

Education serves as a tool to balance the social
imbalances. Gandhiji firmly believed that through
education, we can bring in a silent revolution.
Education is the birth right of all the people.However,
since very long time, education had remained a very

95

Indian nstitutional Values and Education

rare commodity for people in the lower strata of the
society. Gender discrimination and male domination
still persists. Literacy among the poor, rural-women,
Scheduled Castes and Tribal People is still low. Due
to caste discrimination some sections of people were
Kept away from schools or marginalized in education.
Education helps to eliminate this kind of social
injustice. Through’ ‘quality education,.one’s social
status, economié status and standing on one’s own
legs get improved. Those who get higher education
are able to. get ‘job fetching higher income; their
dwelling place will have more facilities and highly
hygienic; they'are able to mingle with all sections of
society with dignity and respect and they are also
able to make matrimonial relationship. They are able
to get a secured life and also secure their children
the best possible education and help them lead a

comfortable life.

Whatever be the ‘Ascribed Social Status’ of an’

individual, if he is able to get good education, it

automatically raises his ‘Achieved Social Status’ and:

he goes up to the higher rung in the social ladder..

To put in a nutshell, education alone can
accelerate social displacements in the society both

.

222

cee

fat

Yn

}

€

¢é@

|;

Po»

vee

zh

oo»

——

(|

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 54
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 54
96 Contemporary India and Education
—SSFSS—S NN OO OO

“Vertical” and “horizontal” and establish social justice

fast.

3:06:3 Establishing Social Justice in
Education

Social Justice in education denotes all students
have equal opportunity to get education and
progress, equal treatment of all sections of students
and the classroom being inclusive consisting of
students with diverse needs...  _

To put it in short, Social Justice in Education
denotes the fair and equitable distribution of

resources, facilities and privileges so that no student’

is affected by the cultural, ‘social and economic
inequalities, in getting good: and quality education
and pragress. Oy

The, two reasons for social injustice in education

are:

(i) Social discrimination
(ii) Marginalisation of some, social groups

Following are the ways to establish ‘Social

Justice’ in Education:

Indian Constitutional Values and Educaiion 97

—_—_———

(i) Providing free and compulsory qua’iiy education
to all;

(ii) Providing free education to the marginalised
and the backward class students at all levels of
education and reservation in higher education
and professional education;

(iii) Establishing. quality Common Schools
throughout the country and implementing the
Common Education System in every school;

(iv) Providing free uniforms, text books and

stationery to the poor students;

(v) Providing free hostel facilities to the backward,
scheduled caste and scheduled tribe students;

(vi) Opening up of more number of schools in rural
areas;

(vii) Encouraging women’s education;

: (viii) Providing financial aid and scholarship to the

talented poor students; and

(ix) “Mandatory reservation of 25% seats in private
schools for local eligible students to have free
education :

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 55
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 55
98 Contemporary India and Education

3:07 Right to Education Act (RTE)
2009

3:07:1 Background of Enacting RTE Act
2009

As the Article 45, which states "It is the
endeavour of the State to provide free and
compulsory education for all children until they
complete 14 years is placed under the Directive
Principles, it is considered only as a direction and
not a constitutional obligation of the government. In
order to provide legal status to Article 45, the
Constitution was amended in 2002 inserting Article
21-A. According to this Article, the government is duty
bound to provide free and compulsory education for
all children in the age group of six to fourteen as a
fundamental right in such a manner as the State may,
by Law determine . The Right to Education Act which
represents the consequential legislation under Article
21-A was passed by Indian parliament on 4" August
2009. The Rules for implementing this Act throughout
the country were framed and came into effect on 1*
April 2010. .

. Indian Constitutional Values and Education 99
a Se
3:07:2 Salient Features of RTE

The Right to Education Act has seven chapters.
Salient features. of this Act are as follows:

1. Compulsory and Free Education for All

(i) It is mandatory for the Government to provide
free and compulsory education to each and
every child up to class 8 in a neighbourhood
school located within 1k.m. distance from the
residence’ of each child. Here the term
‘Government refers to Central, State and Local
Bodies. ° ‘

(ii) It is the responsibility of the government
(Central, State) and Local Bodies to establish
schools in the neighbourhoods of pupil which
do not have schools, within three years of
passing this Act.

(iii) Besides opening schools, it is the obligation
of the government to ensure admission,
attendance and completion of elementary
education by all.children in the age group
6 -14.

(iv) Children have the right to leave one school and
join another school. This provision is applicable

Ccl-8

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 56
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 56
we

a 100

Contemporary India and Education

a

T° v)

(vi)

only within government and government aided

schools.

‘Free Education’ means no child shall be liable
to pay any kind of fee or charges or expenses.
‘Free Education’ also includes the provision of
free text books; school uniforms, stationery
items and special educational materials needed
for children with disabilities.

The responsibility of funding for implementing
this Act is.to be shared by the Central and State
governments.

2. Benchmark Mandate for Primary Education

(i)

The Right to Education Act lays down norms
and standards for each primary school
(elementary and middle school) relating to
teacher-pupil ratio, number. of classrooms,
separate toilets for girls and boys, drinking water
facility, number of school working days, working
hours of teachers, etc. and the government
must ensure that every “school complies with
this set of norms to maintain minimum facilities

and standard.

Indian Constitutional Values and Education 101

— —

ca)
ve

Special provisions for the admissi. 1 of those
children who have not joined the school.

The RTE Act mandates that an out of school child

should be admitted to an age-appropriate class and

provided with special training to enable ihe child to

come up to age-appropriate learning level.

4. Quantity and Quality of Teachers
(i) The Teacher-Pupil Ratio has been prescribed

(a)

(b)

(c)

as follows:
Primary Level (I to V): Two teachers up to 60
children. (Maximum 1:40 — This applies to

‘ schools which have a strength of more than 200

students. This will not include the head of the

institution).

Middle School (Upper Primary — Vi to VIII) —

Science - 1, Mathematics - 1, Social Science —
1, Language — 1, is the minimum requirement
of teachers and the total number of teachers
should be equal to the total number of classes.

There should not be any disparity in the
Teacher-Pupil Ratio between rural and urban

schools.

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 57
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 57
102 Contemporary India and Education

ee ee ISTO rear ene nano a ea

(d) It provides for appointment of appropriately
trained teachers i.e.with the requisite entry and
academic qualifications,

(e€) This Act prohibits deployment of teachers for
non-academic work, other than’ decennial
census, election to the state legislative,

parliamentary and local bodies and disaster
relief.

(ii) Duties of Teachers

Regularity and punctuality in coming to school;
completing portions of the syllabus within the
allotted time; assessing the learning ability of every
child and providing special instruction, if necessary
and meeting parents and informing them about the
progress of their wards in studies.

5. Zero Tolerance Against Discrimination and
Harassment

(i) No screening test to be conducted either for the
child or the parent at the time of admission:in the
school.

(ii) Demanding Capitation fee or Donation is a
criminal offence punishable under law.

i

' Indian Constitutional Values and Education 103

a

(iii) No certificate of birth to prove the age of
pupils should be demanded at the time of
admission.

(iv) No child should be given corporal punishment

or mental harassment by the school.

(v) No private school should be started wattiout the
approval ‘of the government or authorised
agencies. ..

(vi) Government's permission and recognition

should not be granted to schools which do not
have the prescribed standards.

Discrimination on the basis of caste, religion,
gender and economic class of children is
prohibited.

(vii)

(viii) There should not be any discrimination against —

the disadvantaged groups.and‘weaker sections
in the society.

6. Ensuring All-round Development of Children

Curriculum in consonance with the values
enshrined in the Constitution to be developed and
implemented. Students’ all round development
should be ensured by building the child’s knowledge,
potentiality and talent and making the child free of

é

tn

‘HOH DH Ow

(

Vf

r

|

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 58
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 58
104 Contemporary India and Education
a ee ea ee

fear, trauma and anxiety through a system of. child
friendly and child centred learning.

7. Improving Learning Outcomes to Minimise
Detention

According to the: RTE Act, no child should be
held back or sent out before it completes its
elementary education. To fulfil this, it is necessary
to improve the performance of the children in
schools. To ensure the grade appropriate outcomes
in schools, the RTE Act introduced Continuous and
Comprehensive Evaluation (CCE). Continuous
evaluation of learning outcomes of the children
during their study in school, facilitates feed back for
both students and teachers and’ thereby helps to
improve both the learning of students and the
teaching of the teachers.Another reason for
implementing comprehensive and continuous
evaluation is,besides evaluating the academic
achievement of the students; it encourages them to
fully involve themselves in co-curricular activities and
make the students to continuously develop their
academic performance.

8. Monitoring Compliance of RTE Norms

School Management Committees play crucial

\

Indian Constitutional Values and Education 105
ee

role in strengthening participatory democratic

‘ governance. It is obligatory for every school which

comes under the RTE Act, to constitute a School

‘Management Committee comprising the headmaster,

teacher, local elected representative, parents’
representatives, well known social activist as

“members. Three fourths of the School Committee

members should be parents’ representatives and half
of the members are to be women. The Committee
besides monitoring the functioning of the school, will
also prepare developmental plans for the school.

9. Ensuring the Proper Implementation of the RTE
Act -

To ensure the proper implementation of the RTE
Act, Grievance Redressal Cell has to be formed.
People can inform the Grievance Redressal Cell about
non-compliance of the provisions of the RTE Act and
get their grievances redressed.

10. Creating Social Inclusion in Schools

The RTE Act mandates for all private schools to

- reserve 25% of their seats for children belonging to

socially disadvantaged and economically weaker
sections. The State government will reimburse the
tuition fee and other expenses payable by those

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 59
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 59
106 Contemporary India and Education

—_WTJT >

students, to the schools concerned. This rule of RTE
helps to ensure the inclusion of students of all
Sections in the society.

The RTE Act, with the above salient features,
provide the fundamental right to all the children in
India to have free quality education. It mandates
the Central, State governments and Local Bodies to
fulfil the right to education of the children. As per
UNICEF data records, after the implementation of
this Act, net enrolment rate in primary schools for
the year 2014-15 was 91% and 90% for girls. It is
beyond doubt that RTE Act serves as a milestone in
reaching the target of achieving ‘Universalisation of
Elementary Education’.

3:08 Education in the Concurrent List
and its Implications
3:08:1 Provisions in the Seventh

Schedule of the Constitution of
India

3:08:1:01 Union List (List 1) (Higher
Education and Research)

Parliament has the exclusive rights to enact
legislation in respect of institutions and Union

07
. f Indian Constitutional Values and Education 1

\ i 66
Agencies mentioned in entries 62, 63, 64, 65 and

of List | (Union List).

Article 63'.:: The institutions known at the
commencement of this Constitution as the
Benares Hindu University, the Aligarh Muslim
University and any other like institution financed
by the Government of India wholly or in part eine
declared by Parliament by law to be an institution

of national importance.

[Note : By 32nd Amendment made in 1973, Delhi
University was also included in the list]

Article 64 : Institutions for scientific or technical
education financed by the Government of India
wholly or in part and declared by Parliament by law
to be an institution of national importance.

Article 65 : Union agencies and institutions for -

(a) Professional, vocational or technical training,
including the training of police officers; or

(b) the promotion of special studies or research;
“or

(c) scientific or technical assistance in the
investigation or detection of crime.

tan

|" Pm xO ?

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 60
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 60
108 Contemporary India and Education
—-— ——__.,:-——
Article 66 : Coordination and determination of
Standards in institutions for higher education or
research and scientific and technical institutions.

3:08:1:02 ‘State List’ (List II)

‘Education’ had been kept under List II and the
role and responsibilities of State Governments have
been recognised. It is the responsibility of the State
Governments to plan and undertake all possible
measures for the growth and development of
education at all levels (subject to the conditions of
the entries 63, 64, 65 and 66 of List | and the entry
25 of List Ill, as defined by Article 11). School education,
in particular, had been under absolute care and rule
of the State Governments. [However the subject
‘Education’ was shifted to the Concurrent List (List

Il) in 1976]. -
3:08:1:03 Concurrent List (List III)

Entry 25 of the Concurrent List includes
“Education including technical education, medical
education and Universities and Research Institutions
(subject to the entries 63, 64, 65 and 66 of List-1)
and Vocational and Technical training of labour.”

Indian Constitutional Values and Education 109

3:09 Education in the Concurrent List

The 42nd Amendment, 1976 changed the status
of education by shifting it from the State List to the
Concurrent List. The implications of this Amendment
is that both the Centre and States can legislate on
any aspect of education from the primary to the
University level. In case of any dispute, legislation
framed by the Central Government will have
overriding authority. By having education in the
concurrent list, the Centre can implement directly any
policy decision in the States. :

In the recent times, demands are raised by some
States (including Tamilnadu) that education should
be shifted back to the State List.

:3:09:1 Implications of Education in the

Concurrent List
1. To Ensure Uniformity in Education

As long as education remains a State subject, a
uniform policy on education as at present cannot be
followed ‘across the country. Differential pattern /
structure of education (10+2+3, 114+1+3 or 10+2+2)
will be in vogue putting neople into various difficulties.

é

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 61
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 61
110 Contemporary Indla and Education

Se .

Education pattern should be of a uniform character
in the entire country. This is possible only when
education is made a concurrent subject.

2. Better Implementation of Educational Policies

It is said that we failed to achieve the
constitutional directive (Article 45) because the State
Governments did not come up to the expectations.
When education is on the concurrent list, the Centre

will ensure that States implement its decisions in the
right earnest.

3. Better Utilisation of Funds |

It has been noticed that States get money from
the Centre for the purpose of education but spend
them elsewhere. When the funds are allocated by
the Central Government, it is in fitness of things that
it should have a say in their utilisation,

4. Quality Leadership from the Central
Government

We are having leadership crisis in the field of
education. The result is lack of direction. The Centre
should provide effective leadership. This should not

' Indian Constitutional Values and Education 411
A
be taken as a reflection on the intelligencia in the
States but it is considered that the Centre is better
equipped to provide educational leadership at the

national level.
5. Improvement in Standards

Education being a concurrent subject, national
lével research findings could be better utilised across
the country to improve the standard of education.
The Central Government with vast resources at its
command including the options of roping in foreign
expertise, is better placed for striving to enhance
standards in education at all levels in all aspects.

6. For Better Discipline

The Centre should have the power to over rule
the decisions of the State Government. Then beiter
discipline will prevail in educational corridors. In
Indian Education Service, men of calibre will like to
join.

7. Education for Emotional Integration

Development of National Integration is
possible only by cultivating emotional integration
among students. Education alone can nurture the
qualities like tolerance, fraternity, cooperative

fae

fPPLI IIIS

p

e

po

»
éé

p
7)

P

ee Ly

—

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 62
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 62
@ é ay)

o

© ©

112 Contemporary India and Education
TT SF
living, open minded-ness which are-basic to bring

in national integration.

3:09:2 Argument Putforth againsi
Retaining Education a Concurrent
Subject

There are also educationists who advocate that
education should remain a State subject. They
advance the following arguments :

1. Based on Democratic Values :

State Governments have enjoyed the privilege
of having education under their control. Why should
they be now deprived of their rights or allow the
Centre to interfere in the only sphere in which States
have enjoyed full powers? Further democracy
believes in decentrali-sation. Why then education a
concurrent subject, they ask?

2. States have Better Appreciation of Local Needs

The State Government knows the needs of its

inhabitants better. The Centre can not appreciate the

educational needs of a remote rural school in
Tamilnadu or Assam. Further officers of Indian
“Education Service who do not know the local
language can not implement the educational

'

Indian Constitutional Values and Education 113

programmes effectively. Therefore let the education
remain in the hands of the State Governments. |

3. Free from Red Tapism

If education continues as a concurrént subject,
then the interference by more bureaucrats will be on
the increase resulting in enormous delay in the

‘implementation of decisions taken by the policy-

makers. States are forced to seek clearance from
the Centre for everything. If we want education to be
free from bureaucracy, then let it be shifted back to
the State List.

4. Sense of Security to Minorities

It comes only when education is a State subject.
Minorities are more close to the State Governments
and hence may feel that they progress if education
is a State subject. 7

5. Unity in Diversity

When Indian Culture boasts of ‘unity-in diversity’
let each State has its own pattern of education to
preserve its identity and culture.

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 63
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 63
114 Contemporary India and Education

Conclusion:

In this lesson, Preamble of the Constitution and
the four values enshrined in it viz. Justice, Freedom,
Fraternity and Equality, Fundamental Rights and
Duties of Indian citizens, Directive Principles of the
State Policies and Education, Education and
Freedom, Justice, Equality and Fraternity, Meaning
of ‘Social Justice’, Education as a means of achieving
social justice, Right to Education Act (RTE) and the
background of its enactment, Salient features of
Right to Education Act, Provisions in the seventh
schedule of the Constitution, Transfer of Education
from the State List to Concurrent List in 1976,
Implications of Education in the Concurrent List and
Arguments put forth against Education in the
Concurrent List have been discussed in detail.

115

Indian Constitutional Values and Education

Review Questions:
1. Explain the values enshrined in the Preamble
of the Indian Constitution. (B) [Ans: 3:02]

2. Describe the Rights and Duties as envisaged
in the Indian Constitution (A) {Ans: 3:03 + 3:03:1
+ 3:03:2]

3. Explain’ the Directive Principles of the State
which serve as the guide for the States to frame
their policies (A) [Ans: 3:04:1]

4. State the limitations of the Directive Principles
of the Indian Constitution. (C) [Ans: 3:04:1:01]

5. Explain the various Constitutional provisions
relating to education. (B) [3:04:2 + 3:04:2:01]

6. Describe the challenges faced in fulfilling the
Constitutional obligations. (A) [Ans: 3:05
'+3:05:1 +3:05:2 +3:05:3 + 3:05:4]

7.. What do you mean by ‘Social Justice’? (C)
[Ans:3:06:1] ;

8. Justify the statement “Education is the means
_of achieving social justice”. (A) [Ans: 3:06:1 +
3:06:2]

9. Explain the ways of achieving social justice in
education. (A) [Ans:3:06:3] ~

#

ci-9

TSI III IIIT

J,

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 64
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 64
6 6666 6

tif ryPny,

\

oGge@

—]

AnDAM
= jee ecm ERIN eee

HTTEEA TL

’

4

a: aa

rary India and Education

116 Contempo

eee EN

10. Explain the Right to Education Act and its salient UNIT — Il
features (A). [Ans: 3:07:1.+ 3:07:2] LESSON —4

11. Write a short note on the provisions of the Seventh
Schedule of the Indian Constitution. (B) [Ans:
3:08:1 + 3:08:1:01 to the end of 3:08:1:03]

UNDERSTANDING THE
SOCIAL DIVERSITY

12. Explain the transfer of education to the
Concurrent List and its implications on
education. (A) [Ans: 3:09 + 3:09:1]

4:00 ~==Introduction

As a result of globalization and technological
revolution, there is increase in the migration of people
to other countries for education, jobs and commercial
activities. As a result of this, social diversity too has
increased. Our Indian society has many social
differentiations based on religion, caste, language,
rich-poor and rural-urban divide and thus social
diversity is its main feature. Due to the increase in .
immigration of foreigners and their settling down in
India, the social diversity of India increases further.
Unless these diverse communities maintain harmony
and goodwill among themselves, economic
development of the country and rise in the standard
of living of people will not become possible. Ina
situation where there is lack of harmony and goodwill
among the different social groups, various clashes
and conflicts will arise and stall the economic
development of the country. Moreover, in a country

13. What are the arguments advanced by those
who are against retaining education in the
concurrent list (B) [Ans: 3:09:2]

é

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 65
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 65
118 Contemporary India and Education

with social diversity, there will be abundance of
talents and diverse abilities. This makes it easy for

that country to progress in all fields.

In this unit, Meaning and definition of ‘Social
Diversity’, Various levels of social diversity i.e. social
diversity at individual level, regional level, linguistic
level, religious level, caste level, and tribal level and
the Role of education in understanding the social
diversity, instilling positive attitude towards diversity
among students, inter- disciplinary nature of education,
philosophy, psychology, sociology, anthropology,
politics and history, are taken up for a detailed. study
4:01 Meaning and Definition of ‘Social

Diversity’
4:01:1 Meaning of ‘Social Diversity’

Those who live in a society with particular culture,
differ among themselves in various ways. The factors
responsible for this kind of differences among the

people are caste, religion, race, language, region of
one’s living, class based on economic levels,
differential occupational pattern etc.

4:01:2 Definition of ‘Social Diversity’

“Diversity means variety, or the opposite of
homogeneity. In social organizations the term

Understanding the Social Diversity 119
ne ee
‘diversity’ usually refers to the range of personnel
who more accurately represent minority populations
and people from varied backgrounds, cultures,
ethnicities, and viewpoints” (Barker, 2003).

A broad definition given to ‘Social Diversity’ by
the Society for Human Resource Management
States “diversity ranges from personality and work
style to all the visible dimensions of diversity such
as race, age, ethnicity or gender, to secondary
influence such as religion, socio-economics and
education, to work diversities such as management
and union, functional level and classification or
proximity / distance to headquarters”.

To sum up, social diversity means along with
differences in the society from the resulted reflection
of individual differences, the differences arising out
of the cultural backgrounds of human groups also
combine themselves to form the various kinds of
diversities in the society. wk
4:02 Three Bases of Sociai Diversity

realities. They are:

i) Each individual is unique

ca)
4
RB

oP PPP)

e~.
a
oH
o~y
ma
oun»
Se

§ .
6.

y

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 66
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 66
120 Contemporary India and Education

ei ana
ii) Individuals and their societies are inter-related
and inter-dependant

Society and culture are dynamic
4:02:1 Factors of Social Diversity

Factors that are responsible for social diversity
are:

) Social races

ii) Language

iii) Life style (This is associated with socio-

economic status)

iv) Religion

v) Gender

vi) Age

vii) Region where one’s residence is located
viii) Academic and Professional background

ix) Political ideologies / beliefs subscribed to

Among the above, gender, age, personality
traits and professional background are the factors
which cause social diversity at individual level.
Other factors could create diversity at social group

level. oO

Understanding the Social Diversity 121
nen
4:03 Social Diversity in the Indian

Society

Indian society is multi-lingual, multi-ethnic and
multi-religious. India has 18 recognized languages
and more than 3000 dialects. People living in the
Indian cultural environment are the followers of
various religions such as Hinduism, Islam,
Christianity, Buddhism, Jainism, Sikhism and several
others; they are of different economic classes such
as the upper class, middle class and lower class;
they belong to many castes, too. There are different
tribal groups such as lrulas, Todas, Gonds etc. and
racial groups such as Aryans, Dravidians, Mangols
and others and are living in more than 30 States in
India like Tamil Nadu, Kerala, Karnataka, Uttar
Pradesh, Jammu-Kashmir, Haryana, Nagaland,
Meghalaya etc. and speaking different languages like
Tamil, Hindi, Malayalam, Kannada, Marathi etc.

Cross cultural research focuses on the diversity
and recently such researches are undertaken in
large numbers. As a result of this, the view point
‘acceptance of multi-culturalism is the characteristics
of a progressive society’ has started gaining strength.

- For example, in Tamil Nadu, though small number

of people follow Jainism, the government declaring’

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 67
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 67
122 Contemporary India and Education

holiday for Mahavir Jayanthi, reflects the recognition
of the individuality of the minority community.
Similarly, Tamil Nadu government has started
declaring holiday for Onam, the important festival of
the people of Kerala. Thus the Indian society by
understanding its multi-cultural composition, is able
to get rid of conflicts and all can work together to
advance towards the goal of national development.

4:04 __ Levels of Social Diversity

The diversity in society may be felt at the
individual level, regional level, language level,
religious level, caste level, class level and racial level.
They are being elaborated in the following sections.

4:04:1 Individual Level of Diversity

Visible identities like height, weight, hair, skin
colour etc. are the important dimensions of human
difference. Besides these, the two dimensions of
individual related social diversity found in a particular
society are Self concept and Social relationships.

Social development means, understanding one’s
social heritage and accordingly shape one’s
behaviour in a planned manner. Child’s individuality
and self concept develop along with ‘its social
development. In. the-development of these, the

: : 123
Understanding the Social Diversity

wo. ‘ influence,
opinion of others about us has primary inf

according to psychologists.
When an individual engages himself in social
e interacts with his family
s colleagues in the

y a bus or

interactions i.e. when h
members and relatives, with hi
work place, with others while travelling b
train or meeting people
restaurants, he gets an evaluati

through social interactions, one’s self c
values and attitudes get evolved. Self concept

shapes an individual’s behaviour. Individual
behaviour differentiates a person from others i.e.
individual level of social diversity gets expressed.
Individual level of social diversity may manifest in
several forms such as competing for higher level of
proficiency (competition in educational achievement
and -proficiency in skills), for economic status
(competition in jobs and getting remuneration), for
political power (competition to get political positions)
and competition in conserving the culture.

on of himself. Only
onfidence,

Summing up, as an individual grows in ‘the
society through social interactions, his self concept
gets developed. According to his self concept, his
perception of others in the world and his expectations

|
|
i
\

in places of worship or |

al

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 68
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 68
124 Contemporary India and Education

ee nww0jdZéAAW—_
are formed. These play a major role in shaping his
social behaviour. It is the individual behaviour that
differentiates an individual from others in the society.
The individual behaviour that express the social
diversity, manifest in many forms such as competition
for higher level of-proficiency, reaching higher
economic level, gaining political power and position,
attaining spiritual achievement etc.
4:04:2 Regional Social Diversity
Generally, people living in a particular region, will
have the same material as well as non-material
aspects of the culture and speak a_particular
language and have unique life style. Language is an
important factor in developing unity and affinity
among the members of a social group. People
speaking a particular language, most probably, will
have the same religious beliefs. On the basis of this
only ‘Linguistics States’ were formed in India.

As people of each State differ significantly from
people of other States, they think that it is important
to protect the interests of their own State and that all
the resources available in the State should belong
only to them. As such, larger national interest is
overshadowed by the narrow regional interest. This

Understanding the Social Diversity 125

On

leads to disputes and agitations among the States
on various issues.

Even within a State, all regions are not equally ~
fertile and rich with resources. Some parts of the
State are fertile as they get perennial flow of river
water and some are hilly areas and some others are
barren. People’s life style and the standard of living
largely depend upon the richness of the region.
Hence this results in regional divide among the
people of the same State. In the undivided Andhra
Pradesh, except the Hyderabad city, costal districts,
river basins of Krishna and Godavari, other parts

‘particularly Royalaseema and Telengana regions

were backward without much development. Hence
separate Telengana State Movement gained

momentum. Because of this, Telengana region was -

separated from Andhra Pradesh and formed as a

separate State.

Stated in brief, though people are united by
language and religion, due to the regional differences
and sentiments, national interests are sidelined. As
a result, people living in each region are socially

isolated and parochialism start developing. This kind

of regional feeling, socially isolating people of one

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 69
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 69
126 Contemporary India and Education

region from those living in other regions, is known
as ‘Regional Social Diversity’.

Implications of the regional level social diversity
are listed in the following table:

Desirable Effects Undesirable Effects

It may result in considering
people in other regions of
the country -as ‘outsiders’
and hate them.

People living indifferent
regions neither care to
define the problems among
them nor take any initiative
to solve them.

As the problems between
various regions remain
unsolved or delayed indefi-
nitely, it results in frequent
disputes and agitations.

As people living in different
regions are divided among
themselves, national
interests get affected

Uniting people living in a
particular region and promoting
a sense of unity

People living in an area identify
the problems among them and
try to get solution for the same.

As solutions to the problems of
people living in an area are
found then and there, no
dispute or agitation arise.

All people will act together
keeping in mind the interests of
their region and its develop-
ment, utilization and conserva-
tion of its resources.

4:04:3 Social Diversity at Linguistic Level

Though India has more than 3000 languages
remaining at present as spoken languages, gih

Schedule of the Indian Constitution recognizes only -

22 languages as official languages. They are
(i) Assami, (ii) Bengali, (iii) Guajarati, (iv) Hindi,

Understanding the Social Diversity 127
oe
(v) Kannada, (vi) Kashmiri, (vii) Konkani,
(viii) Malayalam, (ix) Manipuri, (x) Marathi, (xi) Nepali,
(xii) Oriya, (xiii) Punjabi, (xiv) Sanskrit, (xv) Tamil,
(xvi) Telugu, (xvii) Urudu, (xviii) Sindhi, (xix) Santhali,
(xx) Boro, (xxi) Mythili and (xxii) Dogri. But four of
these languages viz. Sanskrit, Kashmiri, Nepali and
Boro, though spoken by a considerable number of
people in some parts of India, they are not official
languages in any State of the Indian Union. But, all
these languages dre rich in literature. Hindi in
Devanagari script, spoken by majority of people in
India; is recognized as the Official Language of the
Indian Union by the Constitution i.e. National
Language of India. The second largest language
Telugu, is spoken by more than 60 million people,
mostly by the people who live in Andhra Pradesh

- and Telengana states. Most of the languages spoken

in North India belong to the Indo-Aryan linguistic

‘family while the South Indian languages such as

Tamil, Telugu, Malayalam. and Kannada, belong to
Dravidian linguistic family.

As remarked by A.R. Desai, “India presents a

spectacle of Museum of Languages”.. Though
_ linguistic diversity had been there in India since the

ancient times, there was always a sort of link

6

tat

oe

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 70
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 70
rs

F ami

rh)

G

G

GGG

és.

ne

\,
\

6 @

vu eoued

|

128 Contemporary India and Education
a

language to unite the people of India though it varied
at different points of time. For example, Sanskrit in
ancient India, Arabic or Persian languages upto
9" century A.D., Urudu from 9" to 16" century AD,
English in the modern times of 17" century to 19"
century, served as link languages. From 20" century,
English and Hindi have been serving as link
languages. Most Indians are conversant with Hindi /
English. Though Indian citizens are divided
linguistically, they are united by link languages and
live with social harmony.

We find people migrating from one State to
another, learn the language of the State they settled
in, and lead their day to day life successfully. For
example, Tamilians who migrate to Mumbai and
settle there, learn Marathi or Hindi in one or two years
and they do well in their daily routines. In the migrated
State, when they happen to see in public places those
who speak their mother tongue, they naturally
converse with them in their own language. One
learning more than one language, helps him to
migrate to any part of the world and function
efficiently.

Linguistic social diversity is making the following
impacts on the Indian society.

. Christians 2.3%

Understanding the Social Diversity 129

eee

i) It helps to make India shine as a multi-cultural
country

ii) It develops tolerance and generosity among
people

It develops people with flexibility and open
mindedness ;

iv) It makes people understand the reality that
language is a vehicle for communication with
others and act accordingly

v) It helps people to find the ways and means to
realize ‘Unity in Diversity’ .

4:04:4 Social Diversity Based on Religion

a Though Hindus constitute about 80% of the
Indian population, India is not a religious State or
theocratic State. Religions like Hinduism, Buddhism,
Jainism, Sikhism etc. which originated from India as
well as religions like Islam, Christianity etc. which
have foreign origin, exist in India. According to the
Population Census of 2011, the percentage of
population who follow different religions is as follows:

Hindus 79.8%  [96,62,57,353 (96.62 crores)]

Muslims 14.23%  [17,22,45,158 (17.22 crores)]

[2,78,19,588 (2.78 crores)]

é

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 71
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 71
130 Contemporary India and Education

Sikhs 1.72% — [2,08,33,116 (2.08 crores)]

Buddhists 0.70% = [84,42,972 (84.43 lakhs)]
Jains 0.37%  [44,51,753 (44.52 lakhs)] -
Others 0-66% — [79,37,734 (79.38 lakhs)]

Undisclosed 0.24% [28,67,303 [28.67 lakhs)]

Total 100% — [121,08,54,977 (121.085 crores)}

There are sects within each religion. In the Hindu
religion, sub-sects like Shaiva, Shakta and Vaishnava
and reform movements like Arya Samaj and Brahma
Samaj are followed by considerable number of
people. Similarly, in Islam, there are two major sub-
sects, Shia and Sunni. Among Christians, there are
Catholics and Protestants. Jainism has two branches
— Digambar and Shwetambar. Buddhism has two
schools viz. Hinayan and Mahayan.

While the Hindus and Muslims are present in
good numbers all over India, other religions have
their pockets of concentration. For example, Sikhs
are concentrated largely in Punjab while Christians
have their strongholds in North Eastern States, Goa
and in South Indian states like Kerala and Tamil
Nadu. Buddhists have a strong presence in
Maharashtra and Sikkim. Jains are mainly spread

Understanding the Social Diversity 131
ee

over Maharashtra, Rajasthan and Gujarat, but found

in small numbers.

Though India is a multi-religious country, Indian
Constitution has proclaimed India as a ‘Secular
State’. The essential features of this are:

i) All people (irrespective of their religion) are
equal before law.

ii). No religious activity against laws is permissible;
everyone has freedom to conduct their
religious rituals and worship without disturbing
the social fabric.

iii) In order to preserve the individuality. of the

~ religious minorities, they are given freedom to
éstablish and administer their own educational
institutions. Government should not deny
financial aid for those institutions for the
reason that they are established by religious
minorities.

iv) In the institutions run with the government aid,
no religious jinstruction should be imparted.
Though under the administrative control of the
government, there is no bar for the educational
institutions run by religious trusts, to conduct

religious instructional classes.
cl-10

>

€

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 72
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 72
132 Contemporary India and Education

ee
Stated briefly, Indian government treats people

of all religions impartially. While the religious

minorities are allowed to preserve their individuality,

it is emphasized that they function in tune with the -

social harmony.
4:04:5 Social Diversity at the Caste Level

All over the world, people are stratified on the
basis of economic status. But in India, caste based
hierarchical stratification is more dominant than that
based on economic status (such as Upper class,
Middle class and Lower class). For this reason, it is

sarcastically stated, ‘India is a country of castes’.

Though during Vedic times (before 1500 B.C.),
castes (called varnas during that period) were based
on occupation and later on became ascribed by birth
and attained the status of permanency with no room
for any change. Now, in India, there are more than
3000 castes, which are hierarchically arranged from
the higher level to the lower level in many vertical
layers. Castes are hierarchically graded in different
ways in different regions of India.

Caste system is found not only among Hindus,
but also among Muslims, Christians, Sikhs as well
as other communities. There are divisions such as

Understanding the Social Diversity 133
— cc

Shaikh, Saiyed, Mughal, Pathan etc. among the
Muslims. In India, due to religious conversion, when
Hindus became Christians, they carried their caste
system into Christianity. Among the Sikhs, there are
caste identities like Jat Sikhs who consider
themselves as upper caste and Majahabi Sikhs, who
are considered as lower caste. By these, we can
very well imagine the extent of caste based social
diversity that exists in India.

No doubt, modern trends of urbanization,
industrialization etc. have loosened the caste rigidity
in the Indian society. The tendency of differentiating
people, based on caste as superior and inferior is
gradually fading out. The Central and State
governments by extending reservation in jobs and
education to the backward and most backward
castes, Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, try
to enhance their social status. As a result of
government following the policy of social justice,
there is. upward social mobility and progress. Inter-
caste marriages and people moving to casteless
colonies (Samathuvapuram) are increasing
considerably.

4:04:6 Social Diversity at Tribal Level

Tribal p+ ole in India are also called as Adivasis.

2

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 73
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 73
134 Contemporary India and Education

Tribal groups in India follow their distinct cultural
traditions, differentiate themselves from other social
groups and occupy distinct regions, especially in hilly
and forest areas.

Scheduled Tribes in India form the largest
Proportion of the total population of Lakshadweep
and Mizoram, followed by Nagaland and Meghalaya.
Madhya Pradesh has the largest number of
Scheduled Tribes followed by Bihar. Bastar district
in Madhya Pradesh consists of largest number of
Scheduled tribes. There are no Scheduled Tribes in
Punjab, Delhi, Chandigarh, Puducherry, Haryana and
Jammu and Kashmir.

in india, there are more than 50 tribal groups.
The important among them are listed hereunder.

Name of the Habitation
Tribal Group

Arunachal Pradesh

1. | Abors

2. | Aptanis Arunachal Pradesh

3. | Badagas Tamil Nadu

4. | Baiga Madhya Pradesh

5. | Bhils Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, some of

parts of Gujarat.and Rajasthan

r

a! De

achai Pradesh

lop)
ioe]
o

rr

Understanding the Social Diversity 135
ee

7. | Chakma Tripura

8. | Chenchus Andhra Pradesh and Odisha

9. | Gaddis Himachal Pradesh

10.] Garos Meghalaya

11.] Gond In large number in Madhya Pradesh,
in Small numbers in Bihar, Odisha and
Andhra Pradesh .

12.) Gujjar Himachal Pradesh

13.| Jarawas Little Andaman -

14.) Khas Jounsar and Babar regions in Uttar
Pradesh

19.) Khasis Assam and Meghalaya

16.) Kol Madhya Pradesh

17.| Kota Nilgiri District in Tamil Nadu

18.| Kuki Manipur

19.| Lepcha ‘| Sikkim

20.| Irulas =~ Salem district in Tamil Nadu

21.| Santals Birbhum district in.West Bengal,

Hazaribagh and Purnea districts in
Bihar and a few places in Odisha

Munda Bihar, Odisha and West Bengal

Nagas Nagaland, some areas of Assam and
North East Frontier Areas

Uralis Kerala ,

Todas Nilgiri district in Tamil Nadu &

a i

é » x F

¢

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 74
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 74
136 Contemporary India and Education
ee es
Tribal communities preserve their individual
identity, keep aloof from other communities and live
in isolation. They still do not have the basic amenities
like housing, roads, transport, medical facilities,
electricity and. educational facilities in adequate
measures. Government of India is providing 1%
reservation for them in education and employment,
enabling them to come out from their isolation.
Transport and medical facilities are being improved
now. Because of these measures, their standard of
living is rising and they have started moving out to
the different parts of India and settle to live. By including
the life style of these tribal communities and their
important problems in the school curriculum, national
feeling and social good will may be developed among
students. ~ "a
4:05 Education for Understanding the
Social Diversity of India
India is a multi cultural country having people
speaking various languages and having different
religious beliefs, socio-economic status and
innumerable castes. It is only by finding unity in
diversity and learning to live in harmony with all our
country men, people’s living standard and country’s
economic development could become possible. The

Understanding the Social Diversity 137
ee ee ee
lessons and co-curricular activities in the curriculum
are to be so arranged to make the students
understand the diverse nature of the Indian society

and the need for finding unity in diversity.

. Students should be familiarized with our freedom
struggle, the suffering and sacrifices made by our
leaders, the basic principles enshrined in. our
Constitution such as equality, secularism and social
justice, steps taken to provide free primary education
to all, measures undertaken for the protection of
minorities and dalits and the steps taken to improve
their living conditions by implementing priority
schemes etc. by including all of them in school
curriculum at appropriate places in subjects like
languages, history etc. :

In geography lessons, information about the
various States in our country, their natural resources
and industries, life style of people and important
products of each State etc. should be incorporated
as contents in lessons enabling all students to know
-about them.

In science lessons, importance should be given
for students to inculcate scientific temper and

develop reasoning ability.

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 75
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 75
138 Contemporary India and Education

It should be made compulsory for ail students to
learn their mother tongue / regional language, Hindi
and English by implementing the three language
policy. Those who have Hindi as their mother tongue,
must learn one of the South Indian languages. Each
student by mastering a minimum of three languages
will get the opportunity to know about various regions
of the country and also the social diversity of India.
Students should be made to understand that the
knowledge of Hindi is essential for all Indian citizens.

Students may be involved in co-curricular
activities like celebrating national and State festivals,
participating in handicrafts exhibitions. Students may
be encouraged to join the National Cadet Corps
(NCC), National Social Service (NSS) etc. and get
training. Every year an educational tour to other parts
of India could be arranged. Video shows and photo
exhibitions may be arranged during the celebration
of Independence Day. In school functions, cultural
shows depicting the culture of various parts of the
country could be presented.

To promote and nurture social diversity in
education, government should take the following

measures: (i) Following common school education
system throughout the country (ii) Providing

Understanding the Social Diversity 139

CS
education for all children i.e. all types of children
which include those from marginalized groups,
linguistic and religious minorities, and dlierently
abled children with the same school environment
(inclusive education) (iii) Providing qavel
opportunities to children to get quality education
(iv) Establishing a primary school within a radius of
2 miles from the residence of each child and a high
school within a radius of 5 miles. Through such
measures alone social diversity could be conserved
in education. Reservation of seats in schools for the
disadvantaged children, providing scholarships for
the poor students and those belonging to. weaker
‘sections, reservation of jobs for the weaker sections,
establishing residential schools in places where there
is no school nearby the homes of children and
allowing them to study in them at free of cost etc.
may be implemented by the government to safeguard
the social diversity in education. Students should
have freedom to learn many languages of their
choice and select, subjects and groups which they

_ prefer to study. These steps also get included in

safeguarding social diversity in education. *
|

&

>

?

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 76
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 76
Contemporary India and Education

4:06 Role of Education in Creating
_ Positive Attitude Towards Social
Diversity

Role of education in Indian Society to create a
‘positive attitude towards diversity depends largely
on teachers. Teachers, with the help of inclusive
education can create positive attitude in people,
particularly among the parents and those living in
the neighbourhood of their schools. The real
challenge of inclusive education is to meet the special
needs of all children with and without disabilities.
Providing inclusive education is not a soft process.
Inclusive educatjon can flourish in a society which
has ‘inclusiveness’ as its ideology. So people must
change their negative attitude towards inclusive
education. Indeed, practical problems could be
encountered while including children with diverse
educational needs, which requires lot of courage and
commitment to overcome all types of barriers. But
most of the practical problems pertain to bringing
attitudinal change. The problem of implementing
inclusive education lies with the unwelcoming school
system and not with the disabled children. In order
to change the school system, there first must be
change in the attitudes of the stakeholders (teachers,

Understanding the Social Diversity 144

students, parents and educational administrators).
One way of improving stakeholders’ attitudes towards
inclusive education is to raise awareness of the
potential benefits of inclusive education for all
students.

It is the teacher who plays an important role in
developing positive attitude in students towards
diversity.. When implementing inclusive education,
applying a particular teaching method for the whole
class, teaching centred on average learners, teacher-
centred interaction are all not desirable. The teacher
by adopting ’Students group interaction methods’
which enable students in each group interact among

‘themselves and interact with other groups, can easily

succeed in bringing change in attitudes in students.

The following three group interaction teaching
techniques are worth mentioning: _ .
a Group Interactive Giassroam Sessions
2: Co-operative Learning
°3. Collaborative Learning
1. Group Interactive Classroom Sessions

This teaching technique involves dividing the
class into small groups, each consisting of five or

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 77
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 77
142 Contemporary India and Education

Six students and assigning them different topics or
Sub-topics of a subject and ask the group members
to discuss among themselves the content elements
of the topic / sub-topic assigned to their group and
engage in learning activities. In these group
interactive classroom sessions, students may
discuss among themselves the subject matter
contained in the topic; or review the subject matter
already taught to them; and do related experiments.
The central idea of this technique is, students learn
through interacting among themselves. Teachers will
Supervise the students’ activities and provide
guidance whenever required.

2. Co-operative Lea rning

‘Cooperative learning’ could be defined as
follows: “Itisa learning process which provides
students to get opportunities to learn in a group
by forming a number of teams, each consisting
of a small number of students of different levels
of learning ability for understanding the subject”.

They share their knowledge, understanding, and
application of the different aspects of the content
material, or the course units and attain prefixed level
of learning proficiency”.

Understanding the Social Diversity 143
a

Executing Cooperative Learning

A subject unit may be divided. into meaningful
small segments or subunits and these may be given
to different small teams / groups each having-5 to 8
students of a class for cooperative learning. Team
members may gain learning experiences by
collecting the relevant information related tothe
assigned sub-unit. By sharing the information
collected with the other members of one’s own team
when they realise that they have got significant
attainment in knowing, understanding and application
of the content materials related to the sub-unit, within
a time frame of 10 or 15 minutes (this duration may

be fixed in advance), all the teams will assemble |

together and discuss their learning-outcomes with

respect to their respective sub-units: Thus after the

students of all teams understand the whole unit by
inter-team interactions, they will return to their
respective team and discuss all the subunits.in the
whole unit and get more insight and understanding
of the entire unit. Finally, all the groups will assemble
once again and share the learning outcomes of their
groups with others and complete the learning
assignment.

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 78
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 78
ae
tss¢

|

oo.
| 7
144 Contemporary India and Education

er

3. Collaborative Learning | :

Two or more students joining together,
sharing their learning activities and trying to

achieve learning proficiency is known as
‘Collaborative Learning’.

For example three friends may join together to
learn a subject topic. One of them may gather
relevant information needed by using the internet in
which he has expertise, the second student may
process the information and organise them in a
meaningful sequence as he is good at language
ability, the third student may classify the information
so compiled based on their importance and
relatedness and reorganise them properly under
different heads. Three copies of the learning
materials so developed will be prepared. All the
three students will study the learning material
individually, later discuss and exchange views
and try to master the subject matter. In this
teaching technique there will be mutual dependence,
sharing of learning tasks and accepting
responsibilities for learning outcomes. But,
collaborative learning is considered by some
educationists as just another type of cooperative
learning.

Understanding the Social Diversity 145

Above discussed teaching techniques help
each student realize that his/her achievement of the
learning goal relies on (i) student's own responsibility,
(ii) the performance of all group members, (iii) face-
to-face interaction with peers to share knowledge and
information, (iv) use of social skills, (v) involvement
of a group as a whole in the completion of a given
academic task and (vi) schoo! classrooms having the
necessary infrastructure and facilities for enabling
students to learn together in group. This goes a long
way in developing positive attitude in students
towards diversity.

4:07 Inter-disciplinary Nature of Educa-
tion with Philosophy, Psychology,
Sociology, Anthropology, Politics
and History ;

4:07:1 Meaning: of ‘inter-disciplinary
Nature’

For understanding a concept in a particular
discipline of study completely. and its multiple
applications in different walks of human life, we may
need to learn the concept and its uses from the
perspectives of different related academic
disciplines, by making use of their principles, theories

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 79
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 79
146 Contemporary India and Education
_

and methods of solving problems. This interaction
between two or more related disciplines to solve a
complex problem in a discipline is called ‘inter-
disciplinary’ approach.

Kockelmans defines inter-disciplinary as
follows: “While attempting to solve a particular
problem if it is felt that the knowledge of a single

discipline is not enough for solving a problem,:

then the knowledge and methodology of related
disciplines are integrated and applied”. This
integration and interaction of two or more
academic disciplines in the study of a subject is
known as its inter-disciplinary nature.

4:07:1:01 | Inter-disciplinary Nature of

the Academic Discipline

Education

According to Pestalozzi, “Education is natural
harmonious and progressive development of man’s
innate powers”.

Teaching-learning activities serve as the fulcrum
in education. For a thorough understanding of the
educative process, one should know ‘What to teach’,
‘How to teach whatever you teach’ and the
‘Conducive’ environment for teaching to make his/

Understanding the Social Diversity 147
her teaching successful and effective. Knowledge
educational activities have undergone
hese years and the other factors

about how

changes over t .
that influence the educational activities, will also help

us in modifying them to suit the present day needs.
In this regard, other academic disciplines like
Philosophy, Psychology, Sociology, Anthropology,
Politics and History have close inter-relationship
with the discipline Education. In short, as many a
concept, principles and practices of the discipline
‘Education’ have been influenced by the above
mentioned academic disciplines, we.can say the
discipline ‘Education’ exhibits inter-disciplinary nature
and approach.

4:07:1:02 Close Relationship Between
Education and Philosophy

. Apparently there seems to be little connection
between philosophy and education, ‘Philosophy’ is specu
lative while ‘education’ is practical. But philosophy
determines the supreme aim of life and sets
standards and values that should guide and direct man’s
educational efforts to achieve them. Thus philosophy
is a major concern of education. There is in fact, an
.intimate relationship between philosophy and

education which may be described briefly as under:
ci-14

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 80
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 80
148 Contemporary India and Education

i) Philosophy points out the way to be followed
by education:

Education means modification of the child’s
native behaviour. But the problem is, in which
. direction, modification should be carried out and what
should be the standards and values, to strive for.
This problem is solved by philosophy which. points
out the way to be followed by the educator in the
modification of the child’s behaviour. Philosophy, thus
deals with the ends and education with the means
to achieve those ends i.e. education is the dynamic

side of philosophy or philosophy is the theory of ©

education. Philosophy gives ideals, values and
principles, and education works out those ideals,
values and principles.

ii) Education is the best means for the
propagation of philosophy:

After good deal of contemplation and
deliberation, the philosopher arrives at the truth and
lays down certain aims, ideals and values. He then
tries to live in accordance with those aims and values
and also wants others to be converted to his beliefs
and live according to them. This can be achieved
through education which is the best means for the

Understanding the Social Diversity 149
hia pms ton me

propagation of his philosophy. Ross points out that
“Philosophy and education are the two sides of
the same coin; the former is the contemplative
while the latter is the active side”. Philosophy
sets the goal of life, and education provides the
means for its achievement.

iii) All great philosophers of the world have also
been great educators:

The great philosophers of all times from Plato
upto the present day have been great educators.
They reflected their philosophical view in their
educational schemes. In modern times Tagore and
Gandhiji, the great thinkers and philosophers of
India, and John Dewey of America, took keen
interest in the educational problems of their
respective countries and evolved new systems of
education based on their own ideals.

iv) Philosophy determines all the broad aspects
of education: —

‘It is philosophy that provides aims to education.
These aims in turn determine the curriculum, the
methods of teaching, school discipline and the role
‘of.the teacher in the educational process. Thus, so
long as we need aims of education, based on the

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 81
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 81
150 Contemporary India and Education

ultirhate goal of life, philosophy will continue
influencing and determining the matter and the
method of education.

Philosophy

|

Goals of life

|

Aims of education
Curriculum Method of Discipline Role of
teaching teacher

Philosophy and education are intricately inter-
related; the former sets the goals and the latter
devises the methods and means of achieving the
goals.

4:07:1:03 Inter-Relationship between

Education and Psychology

While Philosophy determines the aims and goals
of education and provides guidance to decide ‘what
to be taught’, Psychology shows the way for “how to
teach them’. All educational activities revolve around
the teaching-learning process. The important.aims
of all educational activities are to fully develop the
‘inherent potentials of children by suitably modifying

Understanding the Social Diversity 151

ee

the learning environments. It is the principles and

theories of Psychology that helps in the modification
of students’ behaviour in the desirable direction
through the process of education. Application a the
principles and laws of psychology in educational
situations, to solve the different problems faced
in the educative process, So as to make it more.
effective and efficient , is termed as ‘Educational
psychology’.

Knowledge of psychology regarding things that
‘attract students’ attention and those which distract
attention, cognitive stages of development in
children, their characteristics and suitable methods
for teaching children in each one of these stages,
theories related to transfer of learning/ training,
motivation and classroom techniques of motivating
pupils, personality and theories of personality
development, memory and forgetting and theories
related to them, mental health and techniques of
promoting mental health of students etc., is essential

for every practising teacher to succeed in his/her
professional career.

An effective teacher is one, who is not only
proficient in the| subject content but also possess
the requisite skills to select and use the appropriate

i, a

i

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 82
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 82
eoev

|
\

152 Contemporary India and Education

ee

teaching methods to reach out! the subject content
to the students. i.e the teacher should know the
subject of study as well as the learners.

Summing up, it could be jsaid that when the
principles and‘laws of psychology are applied in
education, the new branch of psychology called
‘Educational Psychology’ emerges. No teacher
without the knowledge of educational psychology
can become effective and efficient in the teaching
profession. Hence, it becomes clear that the
academic discipline education has more close
relationship with the discipline psychology than
any other academic discipline.

4:07:1:04 Inter-Relationship between
Education and Sociology

The various branches ‘of social sciences
such as economics, political science, sociology,
psychology, social anthropology etc. study the
various aspects of man. Sociology as distinct from
other disciplines, studies the behaviour of ‘Man’ in
‘Society’. It is not interested in the study of man, just
as'he ‘is’ or as he ‘was’, but instead in thé study of
man in his behavioural reactions with other men in
society and with social institutions. It is interested in
his reactions in the group where he lives.

Understanding the Social Diversity 153

Finney and Zeleny define educational sociology
as “the discipline which interprets educational
problems on the basis of sociology”.

Educational institutions set up their goals
according to the expectations of the society in which
they function. The activities, curricular programmes
and courses taught in educational institutions will all
depend on the present demands and future plans of
the society.

When we apply the principles and theories of
sociology in education, to develop educational
practices by considering educational institutions as
a miniature society and education as a powerful
agent of social change, then it becomes ‘Educational
Sociology’. Following are mentioned as important
objectives of educational sociology:

To understand

~

i) the role of the teacher in the community
ii) the role of school as an instrument of social change

iii) the needs of the society in which the school
~ functions

iv) the ways and means of developing healthy
teacher-student relationship

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 83
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 83
154 ° Contemporary India and Education
a

v) the need for developing close relationship
between the school and other social
organizations in the society

vi) the social factors that affect the school

vii) the social determinants of education of pupils
and make them conducive for teaching-learning
process

viii) how to socialise the curriculum

As all societies do not have the same social
environment, attitudes and problems, educational
institutions should try to understand the needs and
social environment of the society in which they
function and as far as possible get along smoothly
with the society by adopting flexible approaches in
their programmes and practices.

Putting it in short, educational sociology helps
to modify education to meet the needs of the society
and serving as an instrument of social change. In
this way-the academic disciplines education and
sociology are closely related.

4:07:1:05 Close Relationship Between
Education and Anthropology

Anthropology is a social science that studies
human beings, especially their origin, biological and

Understanding the Social Diversity 155
a
physical development, customs and beliefs. Anthro-
pology is defined as “the science which studies
human beings and their ancestors through time
and space and in relation to physical character,
environmental and social relations and culture”.
Research studies in relation to human communities,
their culture and development occupy a pivotal place
in Anthropology. Anthropology involves the
comparison of different societies in order to
understand the scope of ‘human cultural diversity’.

One of the important aims of education is to instill
the cultural: components (like developing linguistic
ability, following the. “do’s “and “don’ts” of the society

. etc.) in the pupils. This is otherwise Known as ©

‘acculturation’. Every society transmits Its cultural
values and traditions to the younger generation
through education. Education not only transmits the
culture of a society from one generation to the
succeeding generation, it also conserves and
enriches the culture. :

Every school should strive to collect. and
preserve the relevant information regarding the
cultural: components like the folksongs, fine arts,
literature, recreations, religious functions and
celebrations, rural crafts and occupations, traditional

F:

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 84
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 84
cation Understanding the Social Diversity 157

156 Contemporary India and [edu

Sas

rYPr

i

nity in which connected with governing a country, a town etc.

Politics is a social science that attempts to

dress and food habits etc. of the commu
it functions. School should ediicate the youngsters
-to know and adopt these cultural components to the
extent possible. Apart from these two functions of
conservation and transmission of culture, schools are
to ‘enrich the culture by bringing necessary
modifications. to meet the needs of the changing
|

explain how societies and social organizations
use power to establish regulations and allocate

@

finance and other resources.

i

Government, based on their power to regulate
and allocate resources and finance, take policy
decisions regarding how educational institutions

, society.

7

Education besides making people living ina including schools should function and put them in
‘society to learn its culture, also helps them to know
about other cultures and appreciate cultural diversity
and inculcate human values like ‘tolerating
differences’, ‘developing compassion’ and 'living in
peace and harmony' based on understanding and
acceptance of mutual differences. The findings of
anthropologists have helped us understand human
beings and human progress ina detached, holistic.
manner. This would go a long way in furthering the
aims of education as they relate to development of
— ‘Universal brotherhood’, a world that not just knows
and respects cultural differences but a-world that

practice, so as to achieve their proclaimed goals.

"4

Today in India, governments both at the Center
and States allocate huge amount of finance in their
budget for education, right from elementary to post-

graduate education as well as research studies.
“Center and State governments through their
education departments and other institutions like
University Grants Commission (U.G.C), Universities, .
National Council of Education and Research
(N.C.E.R.T) etc.-carry out their educational develop-
ment activities. The hierarchical organizational set
ups required for this tremendous job have been
established from village level school to the Ministry
of Education located in'the capitals and their roles
and functions well defined.

wy oe

owe o 6

‘

celebrates differences.

4:07:1:06 Close Relationship Between
Education and Politics

Politics refers to the work and ideas that are

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 85
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 85
158 Contemporary India and Education

Depending upon the Philosophical stand point
of the ruling government viz. whether it leans on the
social philosophy of socialism, communism or
capitalism, educational aims and objectives are set
up and accordingly educational activities and
Practices are implemented to achieve the goals.
Educational objectives determine the other
components of the educative process like curriculum,
methods of instruction, freedom and discipline and
the role and functions of teachers.

If the government follows the social philosophy
of ‘Individualism’, then the educational aims will
obviously be giving full scope for the talents of
individuals to blossom, promoting competition,
charging fees at all levels of education, providing
opportunities matched with abilities etc.

Governments practising ‘Democracy’, set up
their educational aims and objectives as nurturing
individual talents and utilizing them for social
development, giving importance for the full
development of individual personality, promoting
vocational skills, providing citizenship training,
making primary education free for all, ensuring
equality of educational opportunities, providing
scholarship and financial assistance for the poor:

Understanding the Social Diversity 159
a

Governments following the social philosophy of
‘Socialism’ set up their educational aims, based on
the two objectives of achieving social and economic
equality and utilizing resources of the nation at
optimum level, undertake the following steps:
(i) Linking education with productivity
(ii) strengthening national and social integration
(iii) accelerating modernization (iv) developing moral
and ethical values.

In the countries under the rule of ‘Communism’
leaning on totalitarianism, all resources and wealth

_ will belong to the government, hoarding of wealth by

individuals and ownership of huge properties barred.
Based on these politics, aims of education become
(i) promotion of patriotism (ii) development of
vocational skills in students (iii) vocationalising
education (iv) making manual labour compulsory
(v) cultivating qualities like obedience, courage and
discipline. Education at all levels will be free and
admission in higher education will be based on merit.

Hence it could be stated that depending upon
the political policies of the governments, educational
aims and objectives of a State get determined which
in turn:regulate the other components of the
educative process like curriculum, methods of

ra

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 86
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 86
160 Contemporary India and.Edycation
teaching, freedom and discipline and the role and
functions of teachers and financial allocations made
accordingly.

Therefore we can conclude that politics
influences all the components df education and the
educational practices, i.e. politics and education have
close relationship between them.

4:07:1:07 Close Relationship Between
Education and History

History is the study of the human past as it is
described in written documents left behind by
humans. According to John Jacob Anderson
“History is a narration of the events which have
happened among mankind including an account
of the rise and fall of nations, as well as of other
great changes which have affected the political
and social conditions of the human race”.

Everything has a past of its own. Education too
has its past viz. History of Education. History when

applied i in education, ‘History of Education’ emerges..

History of education dwells on how society by means
of its pedagogical agents has passed, knowledge,
values and skills to the new generation in different
social-historical contexts. History of schooling has

Understanding the Social Diversity 161

ee

come into being since the beginning of the 20"
century, which as a branch of social history, studies
the educational process from the past.

History of education helps us understand how
the past events shaped the present educational
systems, theories and related phenomenon in the
area of teacher education in particular and education
in general. History of education also enables us to
appreciate the importance of education to mankind
since time immemorial across the generations. It
enables us to critically examine the important role
education plays in the transformation of society.
Learning the history of education, prepares teachers
to examine present trends and dynamics in
education, draw practical lessons from the past, avoid
possible mistakes and initiate more viable plans for
the benefit of society. History of education throws
light on the achievement of the educational systems
of the past and the purposes they served as well as
their short comings. By examining them critically, we
can plan the educational trends for the present and
future. In short, it could be said that history of
education serves as the base for the construction
of a palace called ‘modern education system’. Thus

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 87
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 87
162 Contemporary India and Education

eee

it becomes clear that education and history have
close relationship between them.

Conclusion:

In this unit, Meaning and definition of ‘Social
Diversity’, Various-levels of social diversity i.e. social
diversity at individual level, regional level, linguistic
level, religious level, caste level, and tribal level and
the Role of education in understanding the social
diversity, Instilling positive attitude towards diversity
among students, inter-disciplinary nature of education,
with philosophy, psychology, sociology, anthropology,
politics and history, have been discussed in detail.

Review Questions

1. What do you mean by ‘Social Diversity’? (C)
[Ans: 4:01:14]

2. Define ‘Social Diversity’. (C) [Ans: 4:01 12]

3. Explain the concept of ‘Social Diversity’. (B)
[Ans’4:01:1 + 4:01:2]

4. Explain the various levels of ‘Social Diversity’
prevailing in India. (A) [Ans: 4:04 + 4:04:1 ‘to
the end of 4:04:6]

Understanding the Social Diversity 163

5. Explain the salient features of "Education for
Understanding the Social Diversity of India’. (A)
[Ans: 4:05]

6. Write a:short note on the following:

i) Individual Level of Social Diversity (B)

[Ans: 4:04:1]

ii) Regional Level of Social Diversity (B)
[Ans: 4:04:2] |

iii) Linguistic Level of Social Diversity (B)
[Ans: 4:04:3]

iv) Social Diversity at the Religious Level (B) Py
[Ans: 4:04:4]

v) Social Diversity at the Caste Level (B)

[Ans: 4:04:5]

vi). Social Diversity at the Tribal Level (B)
[Ans: 4:04:6]

7. State the thre bases and nine important factors
of Social Diversity. (B) [Ans: 4:02 + 4:02:1]
Describe the|social diversity prevalent in India
(B) [Ans: 4:03] ,

Explain the role of education in creating positive
attitude towards social diversity (B) [Ans: 4:06]

'

cl-12
