======================================================================
UNIT IV - LANGUAGE POLICY IN EDUCATION
Content: Language Policy in Education
Pages: 109 - 132
======================================================================


──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 109
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 109
206

10.

11,

12s
13.

14.

15.

16.

Contemporary India and Education

Explain the concept of ‘Integrated Education’
and the strategies involved in implementing it.
(B) [Ans: 5:05 + 5:05:1 + 5:05:2]

Explain. the meaning of ‘Inclusive Education’.
(C) [Ans: 5:06:1]

Define ‘Inclusive Education’. (C) [Ans: 5:06:2]

Differentiate “Education for All” and “Inclusive

Education”. Compare and contrast ‘inclusive:

education’ with ‘integrated education. (A)
[Ans: 5:06:3 + 5:06:3:01]

What do you mean by ‘Education for Collective
Living and Peaceful Living (B) [Ans: 5:07]

Examine the Four Pillars of Education as
described in Delor’s Commission Report. (A)
[Ans: 5:08 + 5:08:1 to the end of 5:08:4]
Write a short note on the following:

i) ‘Learning to Know’ (B) [Ans: 5:08:1]

ii) ‘Learning to Do (B) [Ans: 5:08:2]

iii) ‘Learning to Live Together’ (B) [Ans: 5:08:3]
iv) ‘Learning to Be’ (C) [Ans: 5:08:4]

| Unit - IV
3 LESSON - 6
LANGUAGE POLICY IN EDUCATION

6:0 Introduction

India isa country, where many languages are
spoken. More than 3000 dialects are spoken and are
in practical use in‘ India. All parts of India, spreading
from Kashmir to Kanyakumari, have certain common
cultural elements. At various points of time, different
languages served as the link language.

Sanskrit was the link language and medium of
instruction in India, starting from the Vedic period to
3° Century A.D. From the travelogue of Chinese
travelers Fa Xian and Xuan Zang, we come to know
that during the Jain and Buddhist periods, Pali
language served as the link language and the
medium of instruction. Under Muslim rulers from the
9" to 15" century, various languages such as Arabic,
Persian and Urdu languages served as link
languages and medium of instruction. With the
mingling of languages such as Urdu, Persian etc.
with Sanskrit, languages like Bengali, Hindi,

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 110
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 110
208 Contemporary India and Education
raat il nieesmnanieeneeer
Grantham, Gujarathi etc. emerged and were in vogu
among the people of respective regions. Students
learned through their respective mother tongue.

"In this unit, Language policy in India before an.|
after independence, Official language policy a:
mentioned in thé Indian Constitution, Thoughts o/
Three Great Indian thinkers - Rabindranath Tagore,
Gandhiji and Swami Vivekananda - on the medium
of instruction, are to be discussed in detail.

6:01 Language Policy During Pre-
independent Periods in India

After the British came in the. 15" century, there

was huge impact on education too, like politics and

other fields. Though the regional languages were in
use as spoken languages and also the medium of
instruction in Street schools,.no formal educational
system was in vogue till 1835. English schools were
established by the East India Company to provide
education for the children of British Officers! following
Macaulay's ‘Downward Filtration Theory’.

In 1853, British Parliament, directed ‘the East
India Company. to take the responsibility of Providing
education to Indians and appointed a Committee
under the Chairmanship of Charles Wood to survey

Language Policy In Education 209

een

the educational needs in India. Mr. wood submitted
his report in 1854 to Lord Dalhousie, the then
Governor General of India. It was recommended in
the report that at primary school level, vernacular
languages could be allowed; however in schools
under the administration of East India Company,
English should continue to be the medium of
instruction. The Governor General Lord’ Dalhousie,
made necessary arrangements to implement those

recommendations.
In 1882, William Hunter Committee appointed

by the then Viceroy of India Lord Rippon,

recommended that the medium of instruction at the
primary education level may be vernacular languages
or English; Students should be allowed to get
education through their respective mother tongue.
This position had continued till India got
independence. Rajaram Mohanroy was in support
of education through English. Indian National

‘Leaders like Swami Vivekananda, Rabindranath

Tagore, Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru, Mohanchand
Karamchand Gandhi, Arvindh Ghosh, Pandit
Madanmohan Malavia, Gopalakrishna Gokale etc.
got their education through English as the medium

of instruction.

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 111
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 111
210 Contemporary India and Education

tn
6:02 Efforts Taken to Resolve the

Language Issue in the Post-
independent India

6:02:1 The Language Problem. in
Education

When India got independence, English was
the Official Language. After independence, people
of each State expressed the view that their own
regional language should be the State language,
be the administrative language as well as. the
language of educational instruction. Due to this,
the language problem became explosive and
brought tension among different sections of
people.

The language problem in India pertains to the
difficulty in taking decisions with respect to the
following issues :

1. Which language should be the medium of
instruction at various levels (schools,
colleges and universities) of education? Is it
the mother tongue or regional language?

2. What should be the ‘Link Language’? Is it
Hindi? If so what is the place of English?

|

Language Policy In Education 211
|
3. How many languages should we teach to our
children and at what stage?

. 4, Whatis the position of classical languages such
as Sanskrit, and Arabic?

6:02:2 Changes that Took Place in
Language Policy in the Post-
Independent Period

i) Mother tongue or regional language has gained
acceptance as the medium of instruction at
schools.

ii) Immediately after our independence, ‘Basic
Education’ was adopted as the ‘National Policy
of Education’ of the Indian Government
according to which primary education should
be provided only through the mother tongue of
the child. .

ii) Right to learn through one’s mother tongue was
incorporated in the fundamental rights of Indian
Constitution. ,

iv) Hindi with ‘Devanagari Script’ was made the

. Official language of the Indian Union, though
English was also allowed to continue as the
associate official language alongside, for a

ci-1s a

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 112
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 112
212
Contemporary India and Education

i

Period of 15 years, after which English is to be
withdrawn in phases to facilitate Hindi to take
its rightful place as the sole official language.

[Note : Accordingly, on 26th January, 1965, Hindi
aan declared as the sole official language of the
Indian Union, upon which anti-Hindi agitations took
place in different parts of the country; in Tamilnadu
the agitation was intensive and wide-spread resulting
in loss ‘of life among the student community.
Following the violent turn of events, Nehruji, the then
Prime Minister gave an assurance in the Indian
Parliament that English will continue as the
‘Associate Official Language’ along with Hindi, the
Official language so long as the people in the Non-
Hindi speaking states want it.) . .

v) For the promotion and propagation of Hindi,
various ‘National Language Development
Programmes’ were undertaken by the Central
Ministry of Education, of which the following are
the important ones: -

1

a) Liberal financial grants for voluntary service
organisations working for the promotion of
Hindi language.

|
|
1
‘

Language Polley in Education ° 213

b) Establishment and maintenance of

specialized institutions like the Dakshina,

\ Bharath Hindi Prachar Sabha, to undertake

research and training programmes for
‘producing Hindi teachers.

c) Grant of Scholarship for those students in
Non-Hindi speaking areas who opt for the
study of Hindi, (Postmatric Hindi scholarships
for Non-Hindi speaking areas).

d) Efforts were taken to publish a Hindi
Encyclopedia with 10 volumes.

e) Central Hindi Directorate was started for the
promotion of Hindi.

6:02:3 Recommendations of Secondary
Education Commission

‘Secondary Education Commission appointed in
1952, under the Chairmanship of Dr.A. Lakshmanasamy
Mudaliar, in its Report submitted in 1954
recommended the following with regard to the
‘Language Problem’. :

1. Mother tongue or the regional language should
generally be the medium of instruction
throughout the secondary education stage,

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 113
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 113
I,
i
i

‘ Language Policy In Education 215

i}

214 Contemporary India and Education ;

I
Subject to the provision that for linguistic
minorities special facilities should be made
available.

iv) Modern Indian Language (other than Hindi)

v) A classical language
6:02:4 Three Language Formula

The Central Advisory Board of Education in 1956
examined the ‘complex problem of the teaching of
language in relation to the needs of the country and
the requirements of the Constitution. It devised a
formula known as the Three-Language Formula. It
was accepted by the Conference of Chief Ministers
held in 1861 and approved by the National Integration
Council. The formula established parity in the study
_ of languages living in the Hindi and the non-Hindi
areas by recommending that as against.a third
language, pupils in the non-Hindi areas have to learn
Hindi; another Indian language other than Hindi
should be studied by pupils in the Hindi speaking
areas. s

2. During the middle school Stage, every child
should be.taught atleast two languages. At the
Junior Secondary Stage, Hindi and English’
should be introduced, subject to. the Principle
that no two languages should be introduced in
the same year. ‘

3. Atthe high and higher secondary stages, every
One is required to learn atleast two languages
in all, of which one should be the mother tongue
or the regional language of the child. That is,
the languages to be studied at the secondary
Stage should include :

a) Mother tongue or the regional language

b) One or more language should be chosen

‘ According to the Three-Language Formula,
from among the following.

every secondary school student has to study the

i) Hindi (For those whose mother tongue is not following three languages.

Hindi)
ii) Elementary English (For those who have
not learned English in the earlier stage)

I. _ Mother tongue (or Regional language)

i. English or a Modern European language.

a ‘1a indi (for Non-Hindi areas
iii) Advanced English (For those who have THe V4 Hinal {for Son: Hindi areata)

studied English in the earlier stage)

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 114
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 114
216 Contemporary Indla and Education
eee .
2. Another Modern Indian Language excluding
Hindi (for Hindi-speaking areas)

In simple terms, every child in the Hindi speaking
areas must study three languages, viz Hindi, one of
the South Indian languages and English and those
in the non-Hindi-speaking areas must study mother
tongue, English and Hindi.
6:02:4:01 Difficulties in Implementing

Three Language Formula

1. The school curriculum has become heavy due
to increase in the language load.

2. Dislike of students in the Hindi speaking areas
to study another Indian language.

3. Resistance to the study of Hindi in some non-
Hindi speaking areas, especially, Tamilnadu.

4. Heavy cost and efforts involved in providing for
the teaching of the second and the ‘third
languages for five to six yours (from Class VI
to XII) !

5. Defective planning and ineffective implemen-
tation of the three language formula.

6. Lack of facilities for the’ suey of the third

!

language. _

Language Policy in Education 217

a

6:02:5 Kothari Education

1964-66
Kothari Commission (1964-66) did not endorse
the three language formula fully. It advocated some
changes in it and evolved a new modified three
language formula, which required every student to

study,
i) The mother tongue or the regional language;

ii) Hindi, the official language of the Union or
English the associate official language so long
as it exists; and

iii) A modern Indian or foreign language not

covered under (i) and (ii) above and other than
‘that used as the medium of instruction.

6:02:5:01 Bases for the Modified Three

Language Formula
The modified three language formula has been
evolved on the basis of the following guiding
principles : :
1. Hindi, being the official language of the Indian
Union enjoys importance next only to the mother

tongue.

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 115
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 115
218

Contemporary India and Education

_ A

2.

6.

English being the medium of education at the
university stage and the language of adminis-
tration at the Centre and in many of the States,
will be a valuable asset for all students.

A short period under favourable conditions
might achiéve better results than a longer
period of learning without proper facilities.

The suitable stage for making the learning of
three languages compulsory is the lower
secondary stage (classes VIII to X).

It is left to the discretion of each State regarding
the stage at which Hindi or English should be
introduced on a compulsory basis and the
period for which it should be taught.

At no stage should learning of four languages
be made compulsory. ,

6:02:5:02 Recommended Ways to

Implement the Three Language
Formula

Classes

I-1V

Mother tongue or the regional language

V-VII 1) Mother tongue or the regional language.

Canine Policy in Education 219

a

| 2) Official or the associate official language

af, the Union; in addition, facilities

should be provided for the study of a
third language on an optional basis.

/ VIN- x Study of the third language should be

‘ obligatory. The official language of the
Union or the associate official language
which he had not studied at the higher
primary stage.

XI - Xi Only two languages need be made
compulsory and the student should have
the option to select any two of the three
languages studied earlier or a combi-
nation of any two languages taken from
the following groups : (1) Modern Indian
language (2) Modern Foreign language
(3) Classical language - Indian and
Foreign. .

6:03 The Two Language Formula
Followed in Tamil Nadu

In Tamilnadu the three language formula is not
favoured; instead, Tamil and English are the two
languages that have been taught in schools to all
students compulsorily.

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 116
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 116
220 Contemporary India and Education

Tamil is the official language of the State and
is extensively used in all Govt. Offices and
educational institutions. English is used as the link
language for communicating with the Central and
other State Governments,

Facilities have been created to teach Tamil
from the Pre-primary to University stage of
education. Similarly English is taught from the
elementary to higher education level.

6:03:1 Reasons for Non-acceptance of
Three Language Formula in
Tamil Nadu

i) Giving prominence to the North Indian language
Hindi over the classical language of Tamil,
unacceptable.

ii) Compulsory imposition of Hindi was considered
as making Tamil people as’ second class
citizens.

iii) Itis unfair to make Tamil Nadu students to learn
Hindi along with their mother tongue and
English, while North Indian students get the
privilege of learning only.one language’ i.e.
learning through Hindi. This attempt will

Language Policy in Education 221
naan eee

increase the educational burden of Tamil Nadu
school students.

iv) Since English language serves well at present,
as the link language to communicate between
States and the Centre, there is no need for
switching over to Hindi; moreover English
serves as the International link language.

6:04 Language Policy as Mentioned in
the Indian Constitution

Articles 343 to 350 of the Indian Constitution
clarify the language policy of our country. A brief
summary of them is presented below:

6:04:1 Article 343 — Official Language
of the Indian Union

Clause ¢ (1) The official language of the union shall
be Hindi in Devanagri script. The form

of numerals to be used for the official
purposes of the Union shall be the
international form of Indian numerals.

Clause : (2) Notwithstanding anything in clause (1),
for a period of fifteen years from the
commencement of this Constitution,
the English language shall continue to

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 117
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 117
222 Contemporary India and Education

eee

be used for all the official purposes of
the Union for which it was being used
immediately before such commence-
ment: Provided that the President may,

during the said period, by order’

authorise the use of the Hindi language
in addition to the English language and
of the Devanagari form of numerals in
addition to the international form of
Indian numerals for any of the Official
Purposes of the Union.

Clause : (3) Notwithstanding anything in this
Article, Parliament may by law provide
for the use, after the said penton of
fifteen years, of —

(a) the English language, or

(b) the Devanagari form of numerals, for. such
Purposes as may be specified in the law.

6:04:2 Article 344 — Commission and
Committee of Parliament on
Official Language

Clause : (1) The President shall, at the expiration
of five years from the commence-
ment of this Constitution and thereafter

i Language Policy In Education 223
‘ commencement, by order constitute
. a Commission which shall consist of
: a Chairman and such other members
representing the different languages
specified in the Eighth Schedule as
the President may appoint, and the
order shall define the procedure to
be followed by the Commission.

Clause : (2) & (3) It shall be the duty of the
Commission to make recommen-
dations to the President as to —

a) the progressive use of the Hindi language
for the official purposes of the Union;

b) restrictions on the use of the English
language for all or any of the. official purposes
of the Union;

c) the language to be used for all or any of the
purposes mentioned in Article 348;

d) the form of numerals to be used for any one

or more specified purposes of the Union:

@) any other matter referred to the Commission
‘by the President as regards the official!

Fi

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 118
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 118
224 Contemporary India and Education

es 9
language of the Union and the language for
communication between the Union anda
State or between one State and another and
their use. ;

Clause : (4) In making their recommendations under
clause (2), the Commission shall have
due regard to the industrial, cultural and
scientific advancement of India, and the
just claims and the interests of persons
belonging to the non-Hindi speaking
areas in regard to the public services.

Clause : (5) There shall be constituted a Committee

consisting of thirty members, of whom

twenty shall be members of the Lok
Sabha and ten shall be members of the
Rajya Sabha to be elected respectively
by the members of the Lok Sabha and
the members of the Rajya Sabha in

accordance with the system of-

proportional representation by means of
the single transferable vote.

Clause : (6) It shall be the duty of the Committee to
examine the recommendations of the

Commission constituted under clause

Language Policy In Education 225

(1) and to report to the President their
opinion thereon.

Clause : (7) Notwithstanding anything in Article 343,
the President may, after consjderation
of the report referred to in clause (5),
issue directions in accordance with the
whole or any part of that report.

6:04:3. Article 345 — Official Fanguage
of the State

Subject to the provisions of Articles 346 and 347,
the Legislature of a State may by law adopt any one
or more of the languages in use in the State or Hindi
as the language or languages to be used for all or
any of the official purposes of that State:

Provided that, until the Legislature of the State
otherwise provides by law, the English language shall
continue to be used for those official purposes within
the State for which it was being used immediately

‘before the commencement of this Constitution.

6:04:4 Article 346 — Official Language
for Communication Between
One State .and Another or
Between a State and the Union

The language for the time being authorized for

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 119
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 119
226 Contemporary India and Education

pa i
use in the Union for official purposes shall be the
official language for communication between one
State and another State and between a State and

the Union:

Provided that if two or more States agree that
the Hindi language should be the official language
for communication between such States, that
language may be used for such communication.

6:04:5 Article 347 — Special Provision
Relating to Language Spoken by
a Section of the Population of a
State

On a demand being made in that behalf the
President may, if he is satisfied that a substantial
proportion of the population of a State desire the use
of any language spoken by them to be recognised
by that State, direct that such language shall also be
Officially recognised throughout that State or any part
thereof for such purpose as he may specify.

6:04:6 Article 348 — Language to be
Used in the Supreme Court and
in the High Courts and for Acts,
Bills etc.

Clause :(1) Notwithstanding anything in the
foregoing provisions of this Part, until

uage Policy In Education 227

‘ Lang :
a
Parliament by law otherwise

provides—

(a) all proceedings in the Supreme Court and in

every High Court,
(b) the authoritative texts.

Notwithstanding anything in sub-
‘clause (a) of clause (1), the Governor
of a State may, with the previous
consent of the President, authorise
the use of the Hindi language, or any
other language used for any Official
purposes of the State, in proceedings
in the High Court having its principal
seat in that State: Provided that
nothing in this clause shall apply to
any judgment, decree or order passed
or made by such High Court.

Clause : (2)

Clause: (3) . Notwithstanding anything in sub-
clause (b) of clause (1), where the
Legislature of a State has prescribed
any language other than the English
language for use in Bills introduced
in, or Acts passed by, the Legislature
of the State or in Ordinances

cl-16

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 120
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 120
y the Governor of the

promulgated b
State or in any order, rule, regulation

ot bye-law, a translation of the same
in the English language published
. under the authority of the. Governor
of the State in the Official Gazette of
that State shall be deemed to be the
‘authoritative text thereof in the
English language under this article.

6:04:7. Article 349 — Special Procedure
for Enactment of Certain Laws
Relating to Language

During the period of fifteen years from the
commencement of this Constitution, no Bill or
amendment making provision for the language to be
used for any of the purposes mentioned in clause
(1) of Article 348 shall be introduced or moved in
either House of Parliament without the previous
sanction of the President.

The President shall not give his sanction to the
introduction of any such Bill or the moving of any
such amendment except after he has taken into
consideration the recommendations of: the
Commission constituted under’ clause (1) of article

Language Policy in Education 229

a

344 and the report of the Committee constituted

under clause (4) of that Article.

6:04:8 Article 350 — Language to be
Used in Representations for
Redress or Grievances

Every person shall be entitled to submit a
representation for the redress of any grievance to any
officer or authority of the Union or a State in any of the
languages used in the Union or-in the State, as the

case may be.
Article 350-A — Facilities for Instruction in Mother-
tongue at Primary Stage

It shall be the endeavour of every State and of
every local authority within the State to provide
adequate facilities. for instruction in the mother-
tongue at the primary stage of education to children
belonging to linguistic minority groups; and the
President may issue such directions to any State as
he cansiders necessary or proper for securing the
provision of such facilities.

Article 350-B — Special Officer for Linguistic
Minorities

Clause :(1) There shall be a Special Officer for

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 121
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 121
230 Contemporary Indla and Education

et

linguistic minorities to be appointed by
the President.

Clause : (2) It shall be the duty of the Special
Officer to investigate all matters
relating to the safeguards Provided for
linguistic minorities under this
Constitution and report to the
President upon those matters at such
intervals as the President may direct,
and the President shall Cause all such
reports to be laid before each House
of Parliament, and sent to. the
Governments. of the States
concerned.

6:04:9 Article 351 — Directive for
Development of the Hindi
Language —

It shall be the duty of the Union to Promote the
spread of the Hindi language, to develop it so that it
May serve as a medium of expression for all the
elements of the composite culture of India’ and to
secure its enrichment by assimilating without
interfering with its genius, the forms, style and
expressions used in Hindustani and in the other

‘

Gairyuene Policy In Education 231
and by drawing, wherever necessary or desirab e,
for its vocabulary, primarily on Sanskrit. and
secondarily on other languages.

Putting in. brief, the Indian Goneiiivtian has
analysed the language policy in detail ang has
constituted more than eight Articles, of which Articles
343, 345, 348 and 350 are very important.

6:05 The Problem of Link Language

Lack of a link language has been one of the chief
disintegrating factors in India. A common language
would help to foster common culture, common ideals
and goals, common faith and aspirations.

The problem of national language has been
worrying the national leaders from the inception of
the national movement and they have considered
the claims of different languages for the purposes
and proclaimed Hindi as the prospective and possible
national link language.

Article 343 says :.“the official language of the
Union shall be Hindi in Devanagiri.script.”

Article 343 further says : “that for a period of 15
years from the commencement of this Constitution,

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 122
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 122
232 Contemporary Indla and Education

a Sentemporary ine SE
English shall continue to be used for official purposes
of the Union of which it was being used before such
commencement.”

Despite these Articles in the Indian Constitution,
the battle of languages is still continuing in one form
or the other.

As per the Article 343 of the Indian Constitution,
on January 26, 1965 (15 years after the
commencement of the constitution), Hindi was
declared as the sole official language of the Indian
Union, following which there were violent agitations
in South India, especially Tamilnadu. To stop the
popular upsurge and restore peace, a written
assurance was given in the Indian Parliament to
permit the continuance of English as the associate
official language till all Southern States accept the
special status of Hindi as the sole official language.

Protagonists of Hindi should understand that
Hindi cannot gain the status of a link language by
force or strict imposition. It has to be accepted by all
people out of clear understanding and voluntary
choice. Antagonism to English does not pave the way
for the expansion of Hindi. Attempts to popularise
Hindi in the non-Hindi-speaking vareas should be

Language Policy in Education 233

a
made elaborately and extensively before
used for the extremely responsible purposes such
as means of inter-state communication, medium of
inter university transaction and as the all India official

it can be

language.

Multilingualism is not a social evil if there is
proper understanding and appreciation of it. Wrong
training, false loyalties to one’s own language will
lead to development of discord, imbalance and
linguistic prejudices. Multiplicity of languages should
not be taken to promote disunity, to destroy national
cohesion, to cause disintegration or. to lead to
linguistic insanity.

: People in India must be educated to develop,
the capacity for clear thinking and felicitaus
expression. The national link language should be
promoted by joint deliberations of.educationists,
administrators, statesmen and policy makers. Private
and public energy must be channelised to achieve
the desire of establishing a national link language

_that gains all India currency for all times to come.

Education can do much to popularise Hindi as the
link language. Development of Hindi as a national
link language also helps to foster national integration
without detriment to the interests of regional

é

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 123
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 123
234

Contemporary Indla and Education

—.

languages and English. Though all these may require

along period, it is wise to patiently wait for the smooth
transition,

6:05:41

Programmes Undertaken to
Develop Hindi as the Link
Language

1) The three-language formula has been

2)

3)

4)

5)

developed in the educational field to acquaint

people with the national link language from
childhood. :

In many non-Hindi-speaking states, Hindi is
being taught as the second language up to the
secondary level of education.

The Government Officials of non-Hindi-speaking
areas are expected to pass a minimum
Stipulated examination in Hindi and as an
incentive their increments are linked to it after
appointment or Promotion to certain cadres.

Dakshina Bharat Hindi Prachar Sabha has done

pioneering work to Popularise Hindi in South
India.

The Government of India has instituted a large
number of scholarships for the study of Hindi
by the people of non-Hindi-speaking areas.

ge Policy In Education is

Langua

u

i uage form

8) Tares ss and telegraphs department aise
railways,

will help popularisation of Hindi.

; loped as the common
ri’ was deve
7) ‘Devanaga

ript for Hindi.
sc he Place of English in the Nationa

Language Policy

English is one of the richest Neale kine
languages in the world. We should value it f a oth
the cultural and political reasons as the me aa of
intercourse in the international sphere. ‘ is a
language of widest international currency. It is the
language of science and literature of the world. In
India it is widely known among the educated classes,
This language brought about the political awakening
in the nation and also helped our cultural
renaissance. It has produced many Indian scholars,
poets, politicians, statesmen and scientists. We
should take care to maintain the high standards of
English in our country. “India has a great and
significant contribution to make to the thought and
culture of the world and she will do so both through
her own language and through English”; said Dr. K.G
Saiyidain. It has alspecial relation with the people

i
\

\ é

6:06

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 124
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 124
236 : Contemporary Indla and Education

pore SS

and other languages of India and as such not an
alien language. But still there is conflict about the
continuance of English as an administrative language
between the north and the South. People in the North
argue that only.a small percentage of people know
English and hence cannot be the common language
of India. They intend to replace English by Hindi for
which South Indians are not willing. Through the
English language we can keep contact with any part
of the world. It will be a great loss, if we give up this
language. Therefore it is wise to continue English as
the Associate Official Language of. the country till
people in the South also concur emotionally with the
decision of making Hindi as the sole official language
of India. ‘

6:07 The Problem of Medium of
Instruction

At all levels of education, learning through one’s
own mother tongue is the best, as it is quite natural
for the child to think.through its native language. It
becomes easier for it, if taught through mother tongue
to understand and react to what others say. This
makes learning economical as it eliminates the loss
of time and money.

Language Polley In Education 237

a

When taught through an Indian language other
than one’s own mother tongue or a foreign language
like English, then attaining proficiency in that
language becomes imperative to understand the
curricular content taught in the class. This twin
burden of mastering the content and getting
proficiency in the language of medium of instruction
which is alien to them make pupils tired mentally.
Consequently they resort to short cuts like seeking
the help of cheap notes and guides available in the
market and mug them up blindly instead of gaining
real knowledge through the use of standard text
books. This hampers the ability in pupils to think
critically and assimilate the content learned. That is
why all educationists advocate that children are to
be taught through their mother tongue only and
therefore all facilities should be provided to the
linguistic minorities in a region to learn through their
mother tongue atleast at the primary and secondary

levels of education.

In colleges and universities, it is better to adopt
a common federal language as the medium of

_ instruction to facilitate intellectual intercourse and

natural exchange of ideas among the educated or
otherwise educated people in different States may

a

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 125
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 125
238 Contemporary India and Education

———_—. ———————— Onn

get isolated and start functioning as if they are in
different islands. In India lack of a link language,
absence of a national system of education, foreign
rule for centuries, multilingual nature of the nation
are all responsible for non-development of a common
medium of instruction for the entire country. Till all
people in our country unanimously accept Hindi as
the link language, it is better to continue English as
the common federal language. Still better
arrangement is the provision for students to choose
either Hindi or English as the medium of instruction
for their study at higher education.

Now, let us consider the claims of other
languages as the media of instruction.

The regional languages have claims to be the
instructional media in the respective states. If two
or three languages are predominantly spoken by the
majority of a State, they will be considered the
regional languages of the State. Then all of them
will have claims for being instructional media. The
State governments have to provide for instruction in
these media according to the needs and demands.
lf the mother tongue of the children happens to be
other than the regional language, they have to learn
the regional language also. This enables the students

y in Education 239

- Language Polle

te with others In the matter of government
to compete

jobs.

6:07:1 Ae tel of Learning Through

he Mother Tongue

through mother tongue particularly
dary education stage, minimises
saves cost and time ang
d stagnation to a great

4. Learning
upto the secon
student’s burden,

eliminates wastage an
extent.
easily master what they learn,

2. Students could
e barrier to comprehend

as there is no languag
the content learned.

3. Critical thinking in students get inetsacda The
need for students: seeking the help of cheap
notes and guides “available in the bazaar is
eliminated. If students are taught through a
language other then the mother. tongue, things
are simply cramped and reproduced as they do
not have a perfect command over a foreign

medium.

4. Students could feel the joy and satisfaction

resulting from learning through their mother

- tongue, as it is the language of the heart and
emotional bounds are attached to it.

ae

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 126
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 126
240 Contemporary India and Education

2

Medium of Instruction in India:
The Present Position

In North Indian States, Hindi is the medium of
instruction: for school education. In most of the
colleges and universities too, students learn through
Hindi medium only; learning through English is very
rare. In Southern States of India, students learn
through the respective regional language till
secondary education level; English is the medium of
instruction in all colleges and universities..In some
disciplines of study, regional language is also used
as the medium of instruction.

6:07:2

Summarising all the observations, it could be
concluded that there is no common medium of
instruction for the entire country and the language
problem continues to haunt us even today. It is hotly
debated whether English or the regional language,
should be the medium of instruction. No one could
deny the advantages of learning through one’s own
mother tongue but it will create a situation in which
there will be islands of educated intelligentsia in the
country with practically no mutual rapport among
themselves. Those who argue that English is best

suited for medium of instruction at higher education,
are significantly large in number in our population.

Language Policy In Education 241
a

They plead that the standard of higher education
could be maintained only by continuing English as
the medium of instruction, facilitating the rapport with

educational experts abroad especially in today’s

changed conditions of globalisation in almost every |

walk of life, widening the scope of education and
employment. This explains the mushroom growth of
English schools, in every nook and corner of our
country, adopting English as the instructional

. medium right from the pre-primary classes. But these

schools serve mostly for the elites and urbanites in
the country and the common man is left in the lurch
to attend the state schools where the regional
language is the medium of instruction. While students
coming out of English medium schools prefer to
continue their higher education only through English,
those who studied through regional languages find
it difficult to cope up with the demands of higher
education as well as in their cherished goals of either
pursuing research or getting employed in
multinational organisations.

Thus the confusion in the medium of instruction
in educational institutions continues to prevail, thus
affecting the achievement of our students, particularly

those hailing from middle class families.

o

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 127
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 127
ty

242 Contemporary India and Education
ce ee

6:08 A Critical Analysis of Our National
Language Policy

Indian National policy on Official Language

Indian Government has accepted the three
language formula as its national policy on study of
languages. According to the three language formula,
every student is required to study his/her mother
tongue, Hindi or English and an additional Indian or
European language.

Medium of Instruction and the Mother tongue

In whichever language a child learns the lessons

in the class, that formed the medium of instruction
for the child.

The advantages of learning through the mother
tongue have been more often emphasized by
educationists, psychologists and linguistic experts,
all over the world. Dr. S. Radhakrishnan former
president of India and Dr. A. Lakshmanaswami
Mudaliar, former vice-chancellor of Madras University
and Chairman of the Secondary Education
Commission too have welcomed children learning
through their mother tongue.

Learning through the mother tongue, helps quick

Language Polley in Education 243
Oo
cognitive development in children. It promotes

meaningful learning and avoids cramming by pupils.

industrially developed nations like Japan and Russia

have been providing education with mother tongue
as the medium of instruction, till the university stage.
Therefore it is a welcome step in including the mother
tongue in the three language formula.

National Integration and Hindi

There are many States in India in which different
regional languages are spoken. There is no single
language in our, country which is common to all
people to communicate among themselves. But
among the Indian languages, Hindi is spoken by 38%
of the population. Hence to strengthen the federal
set up in India, promote effective communication
among people of different States and develop
national and emotional integration, it is quite
necessary to make Hindi as the ‘link language’ of
the Union. That is why a prime place is assigned to
Hindi in the three language formula.

“Science and Technology Development and

English \

English serves.as the mirror to reflect the latest
advances made in science and technology all over

cl-17 &

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 128
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 128
244 Contemporary India and Education

mt ee
the world and is the window for international
communication and global business. Today English
is fast developing as the international language for
science and information technology and is spoken
by about 750 million people across the world.

Scientific and technological advances made in
the western countries are mostly reported in English
journals. Therefore eliminating English from our land
is akin to closing the window to view the world. Most
of the conferences and seminars in science and
technology held in different venues across the world
are conducted in English; 80% of research journals
are in English. In this situation, it is unwise to belittle
English in our country. Hence English is also given
an important place in the three language formula.

6:09 Views of Three Great Indian
Thinkers on “Medium of
Instruction”

The views of Rabindranath Tagore, Mahatma
Gandhi and Swami Vivekananda on medium of
instruction in: education are presented below

briefly.

6:09:1 Views of Rabindranath Tagore ~

All léssons should be based on creativity. All

Language Policy in Education 245

a
should study history. At higher stages of education,
science should be given importance. At the primary
stage of education it is better to have the mother
tongue as the medium of instruction and practising
manual labour. The other subjects of study
recommended by Tagore are: Language, literature,
geography, natural science, music and fine arts.
Tagore very much wished that rich learning activities
like dance, drama, drawing, painting, handicraft and
gardening should find an important place in the
school curriculum. It is essential that students’
individual special talents to be identified and nurtured
in natural and unhindered environment. Trying to
provide the same kind of education to all is-harmful.

While Tagore insisted upon providing primary
education in the mother tongue, he stressed that
arrangements should be made for the high school
and higher education students to learn the languages
of their choice. Tagore who wanted everyone te
develop ‘International Outlook’ and preserve
‘International Brotherhood’, made arrangements in

_his Shantiniketan and Viswabarathi University to

teach Western languages like English, French and
German as well as_ oriental languages particularly
Hindi, Bengali, Chinese etc. In fact, in Viswabarathi

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 129
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 129
246 Contemporary India and Education
we

University, Tagore created a separate wing called
“China Bhavan” and made necessary arrangements
there to provide higher education in Chinese
language, religion and philosophy. Similarly, he
created ‘Hindi Bhavan’ to encourage the activities to
develop Hindi language and literature.

6:09:2 Views of Gandhiji

Gandhiji was against the inclusion of English in
the school curriculum. He emphasized the learning
of Indian languages and in particular providing
education through mother tongue.

In Gandhiji’s Basic Education, craft was included
as an important component. He suggested that craft
should not be provided jusflike any other subject of
study but it should be the medium to correlate alll
Subjects of study. Thus correlating craft with all
Subjects, will pave way for ‘learning by doing’.
Gandhiji is of the view that there is no use in rote
learning the information unrelated to life.

6:09:2:01 Salient Features of Gandhiji’s
Basic Education

The salient features of Gandhiji’s Basic
Education are:

247

n
guage Policy In Educatlo

ucation for all boys and

1) Free and compulsory ed " °
ages 7— ; ;

en craft. |
2) Education through the chos m

j ie ith other
3) Craft is not learned as a subject along i he
subjects of study. All subjects are to

. ional
through the chosen craft, using the correlationa
s integrates all knowledge and

. Thi
ea ther than rote memory.

encourage self-activity ra

4) Productivity of educational process — self
supporting aspect of education.

5) Teachers and students stay together and lead
a simple co-operative community life.

6) Mother tongue of the child is the medium of

instruction.

7) Emphasis on religious and moral training.

6:09:3 Views of Swami Vivekananda

Vivekananda did not spell out any particular
curriculum, However he advocated that the
curriculum should be framed in such a way as to.
help developing both knowledge and vocational

‘skills. He is of the view that subjects like 1) Regional

language 2) Sanskrit 3) English 4) History
5) Geography 6) Economics etc. could be included

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 130
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 130
wwowr Gwe Fo Wwe wD

Rennie’ . Contemporary India and Education

et hi
in the curriculum in order to make it broad based.
The subjects included in the curriculum should be
based on developing the overall personality of
students-

Vivekananda-emphasized giving importance to
both Vocational Education and Technical Education
in school curriculum. According to Vivekananda,
along with oriental subjects like Vedanta, Religion,
Philosophy etc. Western subjects like Science,
Engineering and Technology should be included in
the curriculum. Every school campus should be a
place of vocational training having Workshop,
Agricultural Farm and Industrial units in it.

He was in favour of providing primary education
through mother tongue. Though he considered as

- essential to provide text books and other instructional

materials that too in regional: languages, he had a

favourable attitude for having English as a language

subject and using English as the medium of

instruction.

6:10 Comparison of the Views of
Gandhiji, Vivekananda and Tagore
on the Medium of Instruction

Gandhiji was firm in his views that education at

Language Policy In Education 249
a
school level should be provided only through the
mother tongue / regional language. He was totally
against including English in the school cdrriculdm.
He preferred ‘Activity Based Teaching’ over’ Verbal
Method of Teaching’; he supported providing
education through a chosen craft. Gandhiji favoured
to have the mother tongue of students as the medium
of instruction rather than the regional language.

On the other hand, as Vivekananda gave
importance to-the inclusion of science, industrial
training, technical education etc. in the school
curriculum, he was favourble to have English as a
language subject as well as using it as the medium
of instruction.

Rabindranath Tagore also like Gandhiji, stressed
that medium of instruction at the primary education
level should be the mother tongue. However as he
gave much emphasis for developing creativity in
students, universal brotherhood and more freedom
to students, he took the stand that in higher
secondary education and higher education, students
should have the freedom to chose and study
Western languages like English, French and German
and oriental languages like Sanskrit, Hindi and
Chinese.

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 131
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 131
250 Contemporary India and Education

Stated briefly, while Gandhiji supported the
learning of mother tongue and Hindi, both
Vivekananda and Tagore were in favour of students
learning other languages along with mother tongue.

Conclusion

In this unit, Language policy followed in India at
various periods, before and after independence,
Changes made in the language policy in India after
independence, Language Policy as mentioned in the
Indian Constitution, Problems faced in implementing

the national language policy and three language
formula, Two language policy followed in Tamil Nadu,
Problem of Link language, Place of English in the
National Language Policy, Problem regarding
medium of instruction, Present position of medium
of instruction in India, Thoughts of three Great Indian
thinkers - Rabindranath Tagore, Gandhiji and Swami
Vivekananda — on medium of instruction, were
discussed in detail.

Language Policy In Education 251

a

Review Questions

1.

detail the language problem

lain in
a Ans: 6:02:1 + 6:02:4 +

prevailing in India. (A) [
6:02:4:01 + 6:05 + 6:06 + 6:07]

Critically examine the statement that “It is good
to have education through the mother tongue
at all levels of education”. (B) [Ans: 6:07 +
6:07:1]

Explain the changes that took place in the
language policy in India after independence. (B)
[Ans: 6:02:2]

Explain the language policy prevailed during the
various periods of time, before Indian
independence. (B) [Ans: 6:01]

Describe the recommendations of Secondary
Education Commission on language problem
in education. (B) [Ans: 6:02:3]

What do you understand by “Three language
formula”? (C) [Ans: 6:02:4]

What are the problems encountered in
implementing the three language formula? (C)
{Ans: 6:02:4101]

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 132
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 132
Education

252 Contemporary Indla and '
8. State the recommendations of Kothari

regarding the

Education Commission
languages to be taught in schools. (C)
State the modified three language fonmula (C)
[Ans: 6:02: 5]
9. What are the ways recommended to implement
the three language formula? (C)
[Ans: 6:02:5:02] -
10. Explain the two language policy of Tamil Nadu.
(C) [Ans: 6:03]
11. Explain the reasons for non-acceptance of three
language formula in Tamil Nadu. (C)
[Ans: 6:03:1] _
12. Explain the problem of link language in India.
(B) [Ans: 6:05]

13. Describe the place of.English in the National
Language Policy. (B) [Ans: 6:06]

14. Explain the problem of medium of instruction
and discuss the present position of medium of
instruction in India. (A) [Ans: 6:07 + 6:07:1 +

6:07:2]

15. Critically examine the National Language Policy.
(A) [Ans: 6:08]

OR

Language Policy in Education 253

a

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

Explain the language policy as mentioned in the
Indian Constitution (A) [Ans: 6:04 + 6:04:1 to
the end of 6:04:9]

What are the steps taken to popularize Hindi
as the link language? (B) [Ans: 6:05:1]

What are the benefits of learning through

mother tongue? (C) [Ans: 6:07:1]

Explain the views of Rabindranath Tagore,
Gandhiji and Vivekananda on the medium of
instruction. (A) [Ans: 6:09 + 6:09:1 to the end

of 6:09:3]

Compare and contrast the views of Rabindranath
Tagore, Gandhiji and Vivekananda on the
medium of instruction. (A) [Ans: 6:09 + 6:09:1
+ 6:09:2 + 6:09:3 + 6:10]

Explain the efforts taken in free India tp solve

the language problem. (A) [Ans: 6:02:1 + 6:02:2
+ 6:02:3 + 6:02:4 + 6:02:5 + 6:02:5:01 +

- 6:02:5:02]
