======================================================================
UNIT V - IMPLICATIONS OF EQUALITY OF EDUCATIONAL OPPORTUNITIES
Content: Implications of Equality of Educational Opportunities
Pages: 133 - 166
======================================================================


──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 133
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 133
UNIT - V

LESSON - 7

IMPLICATIONS OF EQUALILTY OF
EDUCATIONAL OPPORTUNITIES

7:00 Introduction

There seems to be one kind of discrimination or
other among people in all countries. The situation is
such that all people are not able to enjoy equal rights
and freedom and make use of the social resources
and all the facilities available in the society. In other
words there are social inequalities ona larger or small
scale. In developed countries such social disparities
are very less and in developing countries including
India, the disparities are to a great extent. In India
discriminations are based on caste, religion,
economic status, gender difference, place of
residence, nature of occupation and its status.

Education is a great social leveller. Gandhiji
firmly believed that through education we can bring
in a silent social revolution. Education is the birth
right of all the people. However, since very long time,

cational Opportunities 255

Edu
Implications of Equallty of ™

education had remained a very rare commodity for

people in the lower strata of the ane ee

discrimination and male domination stil per i :

Literacy among the poor, rural women, Sche uled
Castes and Tribal People is still low. Due to caste

discrimination some sections of people were kept

away from.schools or marginalized in education.

In this unit we are going to study in detail the
three social evils, viz. inequality, discrimination and

marginalization.

7:01 Meaning of Equality in Education

The National Policy on Education (1986) has
defined Equality in Education or Equity in
Education as making available to all students quality
education from primary school to higher education
without discrimination of caste, religion, language,
region or gender. This implies that all children should
get similar educational opportunities and educational
environment facilitating everyone to get education
according to his/her abilities and aptitudes and
develop their inherent: potential fully.

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 134
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 134
Contemporary Indla and Education

7:02 Equality in onstitutional
Provisions

Articles 14 to 18 of the Indian Constitution
dealing with the ‘Equality’ explain how all the Indian
citizens are entitled to be treated equally.

Article 14:

This Article states that "The State shall not
deny to any person equality before the law or the
equal protection of the laws within the territory
of India.”

Though “Equality before law” and “Equal
Protection of the law” appear to be synonymous ,
they have different meaning. Equality before law
prohibits any discrimination among the citizens.
Hence it is considered as a negative concept.
Whereas the concept of “Equal Protection of the
Law” speaks ‘of treating all citizens in the same
manner under the same circumstances; i.e. giving
special treatment to persons in.differént situations
in order to establish equality amongst all. This implies
positive concept. The principle of all are equal before
law is the natural outcome of ‘Rule of Law’. No person
is above the law; all have to abide by the law. This

Implications of Equality of Educational Opportunities 257

equality is not unconditional; it is subject to certain
exemptions.

Article 15:

This Article forbids discrimination on
grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, or place
of birth or any of them. .

No citizen should be prevented from entering

shops, public resorts. hotels, restaurants and
recreation places etc. and no conditions should
be laid for such entry.

This Article enables the State to provide any
special provisions for women and children as well
as for the upliftment of socially and educationally

backward class people. It applies to the scheduled
castes and scheduled tribes as well.

Article 16:

This Article assures equality of opportunity in
matters of public employment and prevents the
State from any sorts of discrimination on the
grounds of religion, race, caste, sex, descent,
place of birth of residence or any of them i.e. there
shall be equality of opportunity for all citizens in
matters relating to public appointment.

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 135
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 135
258 Contemporary India and Education

ee

This Article does not prevent the State from
making special provisions for the reservation of
appointments for the backward classes, scheduled
caste and scheduled tribe. According to this
Provision, reservation of posts for people of a certain
religion or its denomination, in a religious or
denominational institution will not be deemed illegal.

Article 17: .

This Article forbids the practice of untouch-
ability in any form. The enforcement of any disability
arising out of untouchabililty shall be an offence
punishable in accordance with law.

Article 18:

This Article states that no title, not being a
military or academic distinction, shall be
conferred by the State.

No citizen of India shall accept any title from
any foreign State.

No citizen of India shall while he holds any office
of profit or trust under the State, accept without the

consent of the President any title from any foreign
State.

t Educational Opportunities 259
lity °

Implications of Equa

y office of profit or trust
t the consent of the
emolument, or

No person holding an
under the State, shall, withou

nt
President, accept any prEne a foreign State.
office of any kind from or under any

7:03 Causes for Inequality in Education

es in educational opportunities arise

Inequaliti

due to the following factors.
1. Huge disparities in the socio-economic

status of people: The disparities in the socio-
economic status of parents, get reflected in the
ortunities available to their

educational opp
ent, their children,

children. If parents are afflu
though not intelligent, get quality education by
paying hefty fees. Children of poor families,
particularly rural children depend upon

government schools which are mostly ill
equipped. ta .

2, Regional Imbalances: Great disparitiés could be
found among the! standards of education available
in different states|of our country. For example Bihar,
Odisha, Utter Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh lag
behind in education whereas Kerala, Tamilnadu,
Andhra Pradesh and Maharashtra have registered
tremendous progress in education. Even across the
different districts Within the same State, educational

cl-18

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 136
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 136
Implications of Equality of Educational Opportunities 261

a
parents have better educational facilities and
parental guidance. On the other hand, in rural
areas, home environment is not congenial for
children’s learning. For example, the tribal
children do not even have electricity in their
homes to facilitate their learning; neither they
get any guidance to clear their doubts.

260 Contemporary India and Education
i i
opportunities vary considerably, For example, in state
capitals we have wide educational opportunities
which people living in remote villages could not even
dream of.
3. Inequality in the Quality of Education
Available: Differences in standards of schools
and colleges create an extremely intractable
form of educational inequality. Standard of
education available in well equipped. urban.
schools significantly differs from that provided
by rural schools (most of them are government
schools) which lack the requisite infrastructure

and instructional facilities.

6. Huge Disparities among the Social Classes:
There are considerable differences among the
children of traditionally educated communities
and those from the socially backward and
marginalized sections, tribal communities and
weaker sections of society, in the matter of
educational development. Muslim people
evince keen interest to train their children in
trade and business at a young age, instead of
providing formal education to them.

4. Disparities in the education of boys and
girls: In our country, parents show more interest
towards the education of boys rather than girls.
As a result of it, the number of male students is
higher than the girls at all stages and in all
sectors of. education. The additional learning
opportunities available for men are not there
for women students.

7. Inequality in management of educational
institutions: In India, all educational institutions
are not under the same management. For
example, most of the educational institutions
are under the management of State or Central

. Governments; there are also a large number of
educational institutions under the management
_ Of private individuals or trusts. The nature and

5. Gross Inequalities in Home Condition of
Pupils: Home environment varies between
urban homes and rural homes. tn. homes
situated in urban areas and children of educated

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 137
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 137
262 Contemporary India and Education

EEE SSE

standard of education provided in these
institutions are not the same. Generally, the
standard of education in Christian missionary
schools and Residential Public Schools, is of
high quality.

Stated in brief, though we say the educational
Opportunities should be equal for all, in practice, the
education children get today is unequal, according
to educationists.

7:04 Ways and Means to Provide Equal
Opportunity in Edudcation

To equalize educational opportunities to all in India,
some drastic measures are important. They are:

1. Uniform Pattern of Education

A Scheme of uniform pattern of education should
be implemented across the country in all schools.
As a first step towards nationalising all educational
institutions in the country, government should grant
liberal grants to all schools and enforce uniform
pattern of curriculum and ensure almost comparable
standards in all schools.

2. Common School System for Public Education

The major weakness of the present educational

1! Opportunities 263

Implications of Equality of Educationa
$$ _——
ucation to all

i d
system is, instead of providing good £ ioralaans
children, or at least to all the able children

stratum of society; it is available to a atpall minority
which is usually selected not on the basis of talent,
but on the basis of the capacity to pay fees. The
children of the masses are compelled to receive

substandard education. If this evil is to be eliminated,

we must move towards the goal of acommon system

of public education

-which will be open to all children irrespective of
caste, creed, community, religion, economic
conditions and social status; ;

-where access to good education will depend, not
on wealth or class but on talent;

-which would maintain adequate standards in all
schools and provide atleast a reasonable

proportion of quality institutions;
-in which no tuition Pe will be charged; and

-which would meet the needs of the average parent
so that he would not ordinarily feel the need to
send his children to expensive schools out-side

the system.

Such an educational system has for instance

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 138
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 138
264 Contemporary India and Education

SE
been built up in Russia and is one of the major factors
which has contributed to its progress.

3. Removal of Regional Imbalances

Imbalances in the educational progress among

the States are to be eliminated, For example, Kerala

shas a higher proportion of budgetary allocation for

education compared to that in States like Odisha and

Bihar. The Union Government at the Centre should

make available special financial package for
educationally backward States.

4. Removal of the Urban-rural Dittereneas in
Education

Schools in large number are to be opened in rural
areas and good standard should be maintained in
these schools, comparable to that in urban schools.

5. Importance for Girls Education

Educational and employment facilities for girls
should be.expanded so that they could compete with
men in aj|,walkg of life, on equal terms.

6. Schools for the Handicapped

Special schools for the education of the
handicapped should be opened at least one in every
taluk.

Implications of Equality of Educational Opportunities 265

mena

7. Education of the weaker sections in society

Scheduled Castes and Tribes are educationally
backward and suffer from bad socio-economic
conditions of life. More number of schools are to be
opened in hill areas as well as urban slums,
facilitating the education of the weaker sections of

the society.
8. Abolition of Tuition Fees

In a phased manner, education at all stages
should be made free. To start with, primary education
should be made completely free; then this scheme
of free education could be extended to secondary
and higher education levels. Our country should not
lose, not even one student who is unable to pay the
school fees and continue his education. ti

9. Liberal Scheme of Scholarships

A liberal scheme should be formulated to grant
scholarships and financial assistance for meritorious
poor students. Children below the poverty line should
be provided with free text books and stationeries,
free uniforms and midday meal. All school*children
should be provided free transport. Students at higher
secondary classes should be given free cycles and

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 139
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 139
266 . Contemporary India and Education

OO —
lap-top computer. At higher education stage,
educational loans at nominal interest should be made
available for the needy students through banks.

10. Compulsory Education up to the Secondary
Stage -

We should quickly move to the stage of making
education free and compulsory till the secondary
level throughout the

Recommendations of Kothari’ Education
Commission

The Education Commission’s recommendations
on this problem, as contained in Chapter VI of its
report may be summarised as follows :

1. Direct Costs

The country should work towards a stage when
all educations should be free. The proportion of free
studentship in Higher Secondary and University
Stage of education should be increased to 30% of
the enrollment.

2. Other Private Costs

Other private costs in education (Uniform dress,
transport, Mid-day meals, text books, writing

al Opportunities 267

i cent yea
rials etc 9 increased greatly in re year.
ial tc.)

: asons. Eff
mate ; educational re Orts
cessarily for the’ minimum.
and not ne reduce them to
are needed to materials should be

d writing.
xtbooks an
lee sod at the primary stage.

; book-banks should be
ary schools and institutions

provi
(2) A programme fo} ;
developed in secon

igher educatio :
of hig econdary schools and

: ries of S .
(3) The libraries © tion should contain

. duca
institutions of higher
oe toquste number of sets of textbooks so
an ade

that the students can have easy access to them,
a ; .

3. Scholarships -
(i) Scholarship programmes should receive
considerable emphasis and be made stronger

and more equitable in organisation

(ii) Scholarships Should be of iwa kinds — For
hostelers and day-scholars. Hostel expenses
may be ‘reduced, and the amount of
scholarships should be regulated to: cover all

costs.
. |

(iii) National scholarships should be awarded to the

. top 10% by 1 985-86. 50% of these scholarships

é

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 140
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 140
!

268 Contemporary India and Education

should be awarded on the State basis and the rest

on school-basis.

(iv) A programme of loan soholarship should be

organised for science and professional courses,

to-be extended to arts students later.

(v) Other forms of inet | aid like transport
facilities, day-study centres and lodging houses
(i.e. places where the students can stay
throughout the day and even at night but can
go home for food), facilities for earning while
learning may be thought of. ;

4. Education for Women

Education of woman should receive special
attention, at all stages and in all sectors of education.
Girls’ education should be encouraged by providing
hostels where 100 or more girls are studying,
providing scholarship at higher education level,
separate school at secondary level of education,
appointing more women teachers in co-educational
schools, appointing part-time women teachers etc.

5. Education of the Handicapped

At least one good institution for the handicapped
should be made available in each district. The

quality of Educational Opportunities 269

Implications of E
I

grating handicapped children into

programme of inte
mes should also require

regular school program
special attention.

6. Regional Imbalances

Regional imbalances may be minimised on the
following lines : a) District should be made the
unit for educational planning and development and
the State should spend more on needy districts.
b) At the National level backward States should
receive greater attention and assistance from the

Central Government.

‘

-7. Education of the Backward and Tribals

(i): Expansion of education of the backward
classes should be undertaken through

provision of Hostels for denotified

Communities.
(ii) The education of the tribal people should be
given special attention by providing them
hostels. and scholarships; special tuition
facilities and employment opportunities
should be created for promising young
persons from tribal people.

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 141
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 141
270 Contemporary India and Education
SSS aE
8. Reservation of Seats in Residential Public
Schools
Acertain percentage of free studentships should

be reserved for poor but talented children for studying
in residential public schools situated in summer hill

resorts, so that these schools will not be purely elite”

for the rich.
9. High Quality in Government Run Schools

Quality of govt. schools should be significantly
raised so as to bring them on par with quality of
private schools and residential public schools.

7:04:1 Position of Equality in Educational
Opportunities in Tamil Nadu

In Tamilnadu special efforts have been taken to
equalise educational opportunities and is a model
State in India in this matter. The following measures
have been undertaken over the years.

1. Uniform standards in education: To have
uniform standard of cducation in Tamil Nadu,
government schools in every village, at least
one arts college and an engineering college in
every district have been opened. Free
education is provided in government and-

childre

«

of Educational Opportunities 274
sity

cations of Equa

impli

schools for all students from
who study through Tami
printed for all subjects

ment aided

govern
Std. | to std. Xl,

oks are .
ann Text Book Society ang

at subsidized rates.

medium. Tex
by the Tamil N
ts
lied to studen . .
supp the Economic Barriers: Education
oving F i
= for all children In govt. and ance oe
schools upto Class XII; not even special fees
a cuxie Gezieo fees are collected from
and e apie Scheduled Castes and
n agi
es studying in any educational

ed Trib : i.
a ostels are also maintained

a h
institution. Separate :
for such children to stay and continue their

education. Scheme of providing free uniforth
dress, neon meal, and text books takes Care of
the needs af poor children of all communities,
Free bus passes are provided for all children
upto Class |XII to go and return from school,
throughout the year. Free cycles are distributed
to all poor students studying in class XI. For all
students studying in XI Std., laptops are
supplied at free of cost. For college students
subsidized bus passes and tokens are made
available enabling them to go to colleges as
well as visit libraries.

H . Ps

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 142
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 142
272 Contemporary India and Education — |

ee eee

3. Encouragement for girls’ education: To
encourage girls’ education, government has
established separate high ischools and higher
secondary schools and arts colleges for girls in
considerable number; where women's college
is not located, 30% of seats are reserved for
women in the men’s colleges. In primary
schools, women are mostly appointed as
teachers. For girls who have passed X Std., a
gift of Rs. 25,000/- and for}the poor girls who
have passed a degree / diplama, a gift of
Rs. 50,000/- is given for their marriage, by the
government. A separate university for women
has been functioning at Kodaikanal in the name
of Mother Teresa Women's University.

4. Reservation in education for socialiy
marginalized communities: In higher
education and professional education,
denotified communities, the backward and
oppressed communities have a total reservation
of 69% of the available seats. For students of
these communities, special coaching classes
for All India Services are conducted freely or at
nominal cost.

Implications of Equality of Educational Opportunities 273
ee
5. Expanding educational opportunities for the
handicapped: Special schools for the
physically handicapped are opened in every
district of the State. Further, facilities have been
created to offer integrated education for the
physically handicapped in regular schools
themselves, facilitating the handicapped to
study with normal students. Special quoia of
reservation of seats has been created for the
handicapped students, in education and
employment. Scholarships are also provided to
the handicapped students.
Supply of free text books: For all students
studying in government school, text books are
distributed free of cost up to Std. X.

7:05 Inequality and the causes for it

In nature, all men are neither equal in respect of
their physical features nor in respect of their mental
abilities. Some are stronger and some are weaker
than others; some are more intelligent and capable
than others. This is due to “natural inequalities”.
Such inequalities cannot be abolished. Hence it is
not possible to ensure equality of treatment to all
and also allow everyone to enjoy equal amount of

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 143
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 143
274 Contemporary Indla and Education

$e

social benefits irrespective of their abilities and work
i.e. ensuring absolute equality is not Possible,
Natural differences among the human beings have
to be accepted by all.

However the discriminations practised and
inequalities maintained in the name of caste, colour,
creed, religion, sex, place of birth or socio-economic
conditions are all unnatural and man-made. Such
man-made inequalities are to be totally
eradicated. Equality means end of all such man-
made inequalities and discriminations.

7:06

7:06:1 Meaning and Definition of ‘Social
Inequality’

Social Inequality

Social inequality denotes the disparities found
among the people on the basis of caste and
religion, language, race, gender, political power:
OF economical level and due to these, all sections
of the society are not able to share equally the
social resources and the facilities and services
available in the Society i.e. Social disparities
prevailing in the Society are otherwise known as
‘Social Inequality’,

cational Opportunities 275

Implications of Equality of Edu

Definition 7
The term ‘Social inequality’ or ‘social mneied
means people are being fixed in different social —
of society on the basis of gender, age, an ee
economic status. Social discriminations found | adi
different facilities are services provided for to pro ect
and nurture the welfare of the society such ae the
job markets, other income generating GRPOr tunity,
health services and concessions, Stpoas anal
facilities, and political representation and

Ps

participation.
7:06:2
Wisconsin University of U.S.A. has reurte in its
research study that ‘Poverty and inequality are

inter-twined’. Not only in India but the world all over
is found in one from or other.

Causes for Social Inequality

social inequailit “3 _
Sociologists say|there are two bases for inequality.

a) Ascribed Social Status : This is assigned by
others at bith and not earned by an individual
due to his eforts i.e. an individual has no control
over such assigned social status. It is mainly
based on one’s lineage and caste at birth. It clings
toa person even if he disowns it. In the West,

one’s race determines his / her social status.
cag oy :

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 144
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 144
276 Contemporary India and Education

a ESE EE
b) Achieved Status : This is achieved through
one’s abilities and talents, hard work and self-
efforts; for this individual’s| skills, abilities, self
motivation, persistent efforts, efficiency and
performance are the major factors. This concept
has been putforth and elaborated by Ralph
Linton. :

Other factors perpetuating social inequality are :

|

|. Racial Discrimination |

On the basis of physical appearance and
features, anthropologists have classified human
beings into five major groups. They have categorized
the human races using chromosomes, skin colour,
circumference of the skull, average height, colour of
the eyes, colour of the hair and its structural
appearance.

Important races of the world are :

1. Caucasian - While skinned Europeans, West
Asians, Australians.

2. Mangolian - Yellow skinned Asians with narrow

eyes and short noses. .

3. Negroe - Black Africans.

Implications of Equality of Educational Opportunities 277

else

4. Red Indian - Aborigines (Natives) of the North

and South America.

5. Esquimaux - Natives of the Arctic regions.

These categories were named first by Carleton

S. Coon in 1962 and later on listed with 30
subcategories. The White skinned people in America
and Europe (Caucasian-Nardic) propagated the idea

of White Supremacy.

Il. Caste

In India, the caste system was in vogue even
before the period of Lord Buddha (2nd century B.C.).
During the later part of the Vedic Period, the
Varnasrama Dharmam founded the four major
categories of people in the society (Brahmana,
Kshatria, Vysya and Sudhra). From these four
categories many castes came into being, based on
one’s occupations. The Caste system in India was
initially flexible but later on it became very rigid. For
the disparity and inequality in the Indian society, the
caste system is responsible either directly or

indirectly.
Ill. Religion

In every country, there will be fewer number of

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 145
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 145
278 Contemporary India and Education

oo
people belonging to a particular religion i.e. in the
society there will be religigus minority community /
communities. In some countries, within a religion,
one among the sub-groups may dominate over the
others. These kinds of religious minorities will. be
suppressed by the dominant majority group to reach
the higher echelons of the society. Such religious
minority groups may not get equal rights and
opportunities, political power and representation in
the government. ,

IV. Gender Difference

Gender based prejudice and discrimination,
called sexism, is a major contributing factor to social
inequality.

In theocratic states where orthodox religion is
followed strictly as in the Middle East Countries,
women have no franchise (voting right) political
power and representation in the government.
Women, living in countries under the rule of
monarchy or autocracy, demanding equal rights and
Opportunities is considered as a crime.

In countries like India, Pakistan Bangaladesh,
Srilanka, Myanmar (Burma), Israel, England and
Germany women have been elected as Prime

| Opportunities 279
f Equality of Educational Pp
Implications ©

fully. However in some of

Minister and ruled uccess ri at aniearias
the highly develope | countries ji
president is yet to be.elected

woman to read and preach the

The right to a “
religious scriptures, the rig
and even; to visit some h

the clergy priests. .

ht to lead a religions prayer
oly shrines are denied by

V. Economic Status
People are classified into many categories such
as high income, rhiddle income and low npems
groups and those ‘Below the Poverty Line’. The
Category has an income of less than one famaree
rupees a day and constitute around BOY of the
population. The disparity among the social groups is
widening as the price of essential commodities and
people's needs are increasing constantly.

VI. Occupations

Some people who are doing dirty jobs like
scavenging, butchering, disposing of the dead etc.
are permanently kept at the lowest level of the social
rung and are treated as outcastes. Only when
technology is applied in doing the dirty jobs and
modern sanitary methods are used, they could gain
social respect.

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 146
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 146
Vil. Urban-Rural Divide

The urban people have more opportunities to
avail services like health, education, medical care,
transport facilities and wider social contacts than rural
people. These serve as the causes for the urban
people to progress and the rural people to stagnate
at the lower levels. Though rural development
programmes are being implemented, still the rural
people are at a social disadvantage.

Vill. People’s Attitude

Those who are well versed in English, who are
in government service and who are employed abroad
are more respected in the Indian society and
preferred in the marriage market than those who
have taken up traditional occupations and crafts and
those who have not given up their traditional life style.

{X. Manual Labour and White Collar Jobs

Jobs which involve more manual labour get less
remuneration and command low respect but those
who work under a roof and have some technical
knowledge get more remuneration and respect. This
is also attributed as a factor for social inequality.

lnplications oA kauality A RAucetionas 09771" ae GBA
EY
hk. Dwelling

People living in slum2, those living in huts, single
room thatched sheds or in rented houses are socially
less respected than those living in independent
houses and using luxury goods.

7:07 Meaning of ‘Inequality in
Education’

If a situation prevails in which all children in the
society do not get same educational opportunity and
guality education, then we refer it as ‘Inequality in
Education’ i.e. those belonging to lower social strata,
select religions, particular regions, or gender getting
more opportunities to get quality education while
those belonging to low castes, low income groups,
particular religions, religious sects, gender and
backward regions getting less opportunities for
education is known as ‘inequality in education.

In brief, social inequalities affecting the
educational opportunities of children is otherwise
called ‘Inequality in Education’.

7:08 Causes for ‘Inequality in
Education’ :

The two basic factors for educational inequalities
are:

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 147
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 147
282 Contemporary India and Education

i) Social discrimination
ii) Marginalization of some social groups
Now let us see in details about the two factors.
7:08:1 Discriminating Social Groups
People in the society are differentiated based
On religion, caste, class, race etc. and they function
as different social groups. If all the social groups are

not able to participate equally in social life enjoying
the facilities and services available in the society and

share political power, then there exists ‘Social |

discrimination’. Discriminatory social practices
which allow some sections in the society enjoying
more preference and importance, some other
sections have to be content with less privileges and
importance and a few sections are socially neglected
and marginalized, are called ‘social discrimination’
or entertaining ‘social differentiation’.

In societies where social differentiation is very
strong (Such as ‘we’ and ‘they’), the social groups,
highly privileged and a dominant force are considered
to be the upper class and highly progressive, and
those which enjoy preferences and importance only
to a small extent are marginalized and deprived. In
developed countries Particularly in the Western

ducational Opportunities 283

te
Implications 0 Equality °

i]

. \ . . 3 a
Countries ‘social| discrimin .
least, whereas in a 8 el
India, it is ata See, ee aa erenres
voatniy demote ae ane on the basis of his /

| recognition received

tion is found to be the
countries including
In India, social

mainly ‘ascribed’,

" ia
irth (lineage) and the soc!
aoe then oe tae this state, as the Indian

zes, one’s social status is to be
f his / her performance,

from others.
Constitution emphas!

cquired’ It o
‘acquired’ as a resu
efficiency, motivation and achievement. For
implementing this directive of the Indian sam aaariora
the Central and State governments have initiated

suitable measures.

If we look at the castewise distribution of students
in schools, backward class students mostly study in
government or government aided institutions. Those
hailing from marginalized sections of the society
study in Adidravida schools, Special schools for the
differently abled etc. Children from the socially upper
class and more particularly those at higher economic
level, study in private schools especially in
‘Residential Schools’ and ‘International Schools’.

If we look at the gender angle, many parents
particularly those who.are poor and illiterate, do not
‘send their daughters to school beyond the V Std.

ra

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 148
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 148
204 Conteniporary India and Education

a
but send their sons to secondary schools and
beyond. As a result of this, enrolment of girls is
significantly low in secondary schools and colleges
as compared to that of boys. The school curriculum
also does not cater to the needs pnd social progress
of girls. Parents hesitate to send their daughters to

far off schools and co-education| schools.
i}

As the possibility of subjecting girls to sexual
harassment is there in educational institutions,
parents do not continue the education of their
daughters beyond the level of secondary schools.
Even in higher education. (including professional
education) as subjects that are suitable for girls are
not available; only few parents send their daughters
to institutions of higher education like colleges and
universities. Most of the parents prefer to get their
daughters married than educating them further
beyond the school final. Now, this trend is slowly
changing, atleast in urban areas.

7:08:2 Marginalisation of Social
Groups

7:08:2:01 Concept of Marginalisation

&

In human societies, the dominant social groups
(people with power and high social status) pushing

implications of Equality 01 cducaliona: Cppuntiilics Zou

eee
out those people whom they consider as not
contributing to the society in any way or undesirable,
from the day to day social and cultural activities and
ignoring them, is called ‘Marginalization’.

People who are marginalized will get united for
the sake of their protection and start living as social
groups isolated from the social main stream. People
of such social groups are called ‘Marginalized
People’. Children hailing from the families of such
people are called ‘Marginalized Children’.

Marginalized people are neither able ‘to
participate in the social life nor enjoy any
representation in the political power of the country.
Generally, these people are economically backward,
socially disrespected by the people of the majority
groups in the society, and denied of rights and
privileges enjoyed by others. Marginalized children
or children hailing from the families of the social
minority groups, without having proper facilities and
adequate opportunities to learn for generations
together, remain educationally backward.

7:08:2:02 Marginalized Children and
Their Characteristics

“Children who grow up in families belonging to

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 149
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 149
286 Contemporary India and Education

$e

Social groups which are subjected to the continued
Social neglect, oppressed and denied of tights and
Privileges due for others in the society,

are known
as ‘Marginalized Children’.

The following could be mentioned as the
characteristics of marginalized children :

1) They lack the facilities and opportunities for
learning. ;

2) Due to malnutrition, they often become sick.

3) These children do not get adequate medical
facilities.

4) Due to poverty, they live at remote places,
Mostly on the outskirts of urban areas / villages.

5) Their dwellings lack basic amenities and are
highly unhygienic.
8) They are forced to take some odd jobs at an

early age to earn and augment their family
income.

7) None of their peers in their neigbourhood show
any interest to go to school.

8) The parents of such children are illiterates, not
having any awareness about the importance of

9) Marginali

40) Marginalized

7:09 Types ofS

y of Educational Opportunities

287

om poverty, wi
ion and suffer fr P * Withou,
permanent Job.

ons of equallt

Implicat!

having any i
zed children not only lack educatia,
9 not have any vocational skill; they

d i i
they also st in acquiring vocational Skillg

also lack intere
children do not have role Models

in their communities for development.
1

ocial Inequality
i) India has. attained independence, but not all

dians have learned to participate j,
racy in an intelligent way, equally ang

In
democrac
efficiently.

ii) India’s economic policy is said to be pro-tigy
and generate new rich people. The taxation.
policy is not helping to reduce the gap between
the rich and poor.

iii) Equality in opportunities to progress is found in
a small measure; it has not reached the weake,
sections of the society to a greater extent, as
expected. ;

iv) The practice of sharing power, right from the
family level to that of religion and nation has

not yet strengthened.

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 150
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 150
288 Contemporary India and Education

ee

v) Allcitizens are not treated equally. Government
is not responsive to people's needs.

We shall now discuss how these affect the social
groups and cause:social inequality in the society.

7:09:1 Caste-based Social Inequality

H.Cooly defines caste as ‘the life style and
practices strictly followed by a social group’. Bogley
describes castes. as the hierarchically arranged
groups that are based on heredity. In India, social
groups based on birth are known as castes.

Each caste has its own life-style, code of conduct
(‘Kula Dharma’) prescribed customs, traditions,
norms which state ‘what is right’ and ‘what is wrong’,
rituals and practices. Castes had roots in racial
differences among the human-beings and spread
slowly. In India, there are countless number of castes
and sub-castes. eee. |

The disparity in the society which provides
for making available preferences and privileges
to some castes and denying the same to other
castes is known as ‘Caste-based inequality’.

!

Children born to parents of the same caste are
alone considered as belonging to that caste.

Implications of Equality of Educational Opportunttios 289

ee

Generally, marriages take place within the same

caste.

Mostly, people of a caste Cuininue 10 take up

a particular occupation hereditarily. Caste
inequality is a hereditary stratification system.

Jawaharlal Nehru described the caste system

as the cancer afflicting the Indian Society.
Respect, privileges and opportunities offered to
people of high caste, are not available to those
belonging to low castes. Caste affinities and
loyalties influence elected bodies as well as

national elections.

Though reservation of seats or quota system

in higher education and government jobs has
benefitted the backward castes significantly, yet
the self-confidence, self-initiative and hardwork on
the part of the deprived, has to be boosted to
bridge the social divide based on castes.

K.M. Panicker has pointed out with historical

evidences that people who have achieved high
expertise in business and technologies, as well
as the social groups which they belong to, have

gone up to higher levels of social status.

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 151
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 151
290 Contemporary Indla and Education
a ae

Promoting inter-caste marriages on q large
Scale could demolish the caste structure and
increase social equality.

7:09:2 Gender-based Inequality

Gender baséd prejudice and discrimination,

called sexism is a major contributing factor to social
inequality.

Treating males and females differently in the
family, educational institutions, work places, common
places like railway station, restaurants, cinema
theatres, markets and shopping malls, places of
worship etc., unequal opportunities between men and
women in education and employment, discriminating
views and attitudes regarding the role and
Participation of men and women in different social
activities including considering women as one’s
personal property and an object of pleasure is known
as ‘Gender. Discrimination’. In other words, the
denial of all kinds of rights and opportunities for

women on par with men is called as ‘gender
discrimination’.

Job opportunities for women are not equal as
that for men. Percentage of women among those in
top posts is very low. Though ‘equal pay for equal

nal Opportunities 291

, atlo
Implications of Equality of Educ

‘
ted in principle, in practice th

work’ has been accep joa IS —— doing

pay for women is found to oe gantzadinecti
r icularly in
the same work, particu

; ive heavy
Women are considered as not pace to ee ied
trucks or serve as pilots, aS frontiine so ae
army, as employees and officials involve
ee wi etc.
work in all the three wings of the army

nrolment of girls is

tion't rate of e
In education too, the serae

considerably less than that of boys; their @ wip all
outs is also high. In professional education

subjects offered for men, are not avallakts to itis
In educational institutions, it is becoming common
that girls are subjected to sexual harassment by the
male students and teachers.

Representation of women in parjiamenit, Biaie
assemblies as well as Central and State Casings is
very meagre. Women ministers are seldom given
powerful portfolios.

Now, some States of India have reserved wav
to 50% of the seats in local bodies (like Panchayats,
Panchayat Unions, Municipalities and Corporations)
due to which women empowerment BSrenies.
possible, strengthening gender equality.

Cl-20

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 152
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 152
292
Contemporary India and Education
a

7:09:3 Class-based Inequalities

When civilization started developing in the
Society, various services and occupations also
multiplied to meet its needs. Each occupation
required its own educational qualifications and skills.
Accordingly, occupations in the society are
hierarchically stratified based upon their needs,
importance and benefits, educational qualifications
and the skills required for each one of them.
Generally speaking, vocational status of a person
depends upon his/her educational attainment and
skills, importance of the occupation undertaken and
the vocational experience gained. It gave rise to three
occupation-related layers, namely the high class,
middle class and lower class. The high class consists
of owners of heavy industries, financial institutions
and top officials. The middle class consists of those
in knowledge-related services and executives who
carry out the orders of the owners. The lower class

consists of manual labourers / those involved inthe »

services which require more of physical labour. Such
class differences create inequalities and exploitation
in the society. But the class structure is casteless
and unrelated to religion; it does not also hinder

nationalistic: spirit. a ;

Implications of Equality of Educational Opportunitlos 293

ieee ee — —e—

Stated briefly, class differences are based on
income and economic disparities. It gives rise to

social differentiations and inequalities such as
capitalists and workers, the rich and poor, educated
and the illiterate, ‘haves and have nots’ etc. Through
educational attainments and proficiency in skills, the
vocational status of a person rises. This makes it
clear that education plays a great role in mitigating
class-based inequalities.

The undermentioned steps may be taken to
reduce the class-struggle in the society.

4 Providing vocational training as a part of general

education.
Increasing the number of educated people in

the population.

& Granting liberal loans through banks.

4 Modernisig and updating the labour laws.

A Taxing the high income group, by increasing the
income tax and wealth tax rates.

4 Enhancing the productivity of the workers.

4 Promoting entrepreneurship among the

educated youths.

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 153
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 153
onal Opportunities 295

. . of gducatl
294 Contemporary India and Education j
ighlight th
low to hig c)
hown be
A Providing for labour representation in the select States, are a aqualitY prevailing in India.
administration of industrial units. an-related social In

7:09:4 Inequality Related to Regions |

All States in India are not equally developed. The

main indices of progress like generation of electricity,

¥ ar South India

food production, transport and communication Central India
facilities, educational and medical facilities, per North India
East India

capita income and employment opportunities ; Sikkim
ilabl high i tat hile some other North East India
available are high in some states, while s wooo tive births)

Average
(Number)

states are lagging behind in them. Even in the same I. Infant Mortability’ (P

State, while urban areas have plenty of all kinds of
facilities, rural areas still lack even essential facilities

‘Andhra Pradesh

of life. For example, in education, State like Bihar, , Sana Madhya Pradesh
Odisha, Uttar Pradesh etc. are backward while 3. | North India Tans

F 4, | East India
Tamilnadu, Kerala, Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra 5. | North East India Assam

etc. are in the forefront. Further, even within the same

lll. Per Capita Inco
2014-15)

e per Year (In Rupees during
State, facilities available for education vary j

regionwise like cities, towns and villages. For
example, the educational facilities available in the

Average
(Income)

towns are far better than the rural areas like villages

South'India Puducherry 1,75,000
and hamlets.

|} Central India = |: * Odisha 49,480
Northindia * .} Punjab 99,578
East India ‘Arunachal Pradesh 96,199

North East India| West Bengal . 78,903

Based on the National Population Census

(2011), representative indicators of progress for

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 154
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 154
296 Contemporary Indla and Education

IV. Population (As per 2011 Census)
Average
(Number)

Andhra Pradesh 4.93 Crores
Maharastra 11.00 Crores

| Uttar Pradesh 19.9 Crores
Assam 3.11 Crores

West Bengal 9.13 Crores

South India

Central India
North India ~~
East India
North East India

V. Unemployment (Those without any gainful
employment per 1000)

State

Kerala

South India

Central India Odisha
North India Bihar
East India Assam
North East India West Bengal

VI. People Below the Poverty Line (In Percentage)
during 2013 :

Average
(in %)

South India Karnataka
Central India Odisha_ ,
North India Chattisgarh
East India West Bengal

North East India Mizhoram

7:10 Educati

'y of Educational Opportunities 297

implications of Equalit

- The above representative tables indicate the

following :
i) There are great disparities in the indices of

‘Human Resource Development’ (like ‘infant
mortality and birth-rate, life-expectancy,
literacy level, gender equality, per capita
income, and poverty level) among the
different regions in India.

ii) There is urgent need for expansion of

educational facilities and increase in job
opportunities.

iii) Developmental programmes without
addressing poverty eradication will further

increase the social disparities.

To improve social equality, all should strive
from the Micro level (Village level) to the
Macro level (National level) :

on to Eliminate Social

Inequalities

1. Education for all children at all levels, should be
‘our goal. As the first step towards this, school

education should be provided free of cost to all

‘children. No child in our country should be

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 155
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 155
298 Contemporary Indla and Education

re ene

allowed to suffer from being not able to continue
its education, due to poverty.

2. Students from marginalized sections of the

Society should be given free education at all
levels.

Adequate reservation of seats should be made
in higher and professional education for students
of marginalized sections of the society and
backward communities,

4. Common Public Schools offering quality
education should be established throughout the
country; common education system should be
implemented in all schools across the country.

Every child should have access to a primary
school within a distance of 2 Kms from its home
and a high school within 5 Kms. Central
Government should advise all the States in this

regard and provide the financial assistance
needed,

6. Providing free Mid-day meals to all children upto
X Std; free hostels for S.C. and S.T. students,
Separately for boys and girls should be provided
with adequate facilities.

os §=6©209
Implications of Equality of Educational Opportunttl

I anne
s
7. Free text-books, stationery and school uniform

10

should be given for all students studying In
Government and aided schools.

Removing Reglonal Imbalances : Central
Govern-ment should provide special financial
assistance to educationally backward States like
Odisha, Bihar, Jharkand etc. besides ensuring
that all State Governments make significant
financial allocation for education every year. i

More number of well equipped schools with
adequate facilites should be opened in the rural
areas. As a means of facilitating this, roads and
other Infrastructural facilities should be enhanced
besides offerjng many concessions and
privileges for those who come forward to start
educational institutions in the rural areas.

Promoting Women Education : To promote
women educatian, more number of girls’ Schools,
Colleges, Polytechnics and Industrial Training
Institutes (I.T.Is) should be established. Where
there ‘are no separate colleges for women,
atleast. 30% of seats should be allotted to girls
in men's colleges functioning in those places.
Only women teachers should be appointed in
schools, upto Std. V. Free cycle and lap-top
should be provided to higher secondary school
students. Providing marriage assistance of upto

' fs
\

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 156
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 156
300

Contemporary India and Education

ee

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

Rs. 25,000/- for girls who finish schoo! education
successfully, will go a long way in encouraging
girls to complete secondary education.

Eliminating wastage and stagnation in primary
education. —

Making available scholarships and
educational loans : Government should extend
financial help in the form of scholarships to poor
students as well as meritorious students.
Arrangements should be made to provide bank
loans at nominal rates of interest, to poor
students pursuing higher education.

To increase employment opportunities among
the youths, secondary education should be
vocationalised.

Work experience should be made an integral part
of education at all levels.

In all private schools, public schools and special
public schools (International). functioning in hill
stations, 25% of the seats should be reserved
for qualified students living in the neighbourhood,
at free of cost. (Now the Central ‘Government
has started reimbursing feés according to a
standard scale). ae “be

Implications of Equality of Educational Opportunities 301

a

16.

TV:

18.

19.

20.

It should be made mandatory for all Govt.
recognized schools to admit students without any
discrimination based on caste, religion and class.

In Government aided schools (except the
religious and linguistic minority institutions)
appointment of teachers as well as admission
of students, based on caste and religion should
be forbidden.

In all residential schools and students’ hostels,
students from all sections of the society should
be admitted without any reservation.

By expanding distance..education and open
education systems, education could be made to
reach all sections of the society.

By including gender-education in the school
curriculum, attitude of entertaining gender
discrimination could be significantly reduced.

HA Education for the Marginalized

Groups

The term ‘Marginalized Group’ was first used

in France. Today all over the world, the term is widely
used by educationists, psychologists, sociologists,
political scientists and economists.

Pa

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 157
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 157
302 Contemporary India and Education

Sa

In the marginalized groups, some social groups
(Outcastes) and those engaged in some categories
of jobs (i.e. doing menial jobs) are included.

In India, Adivasis (ancient natives) nomadic
tribes, sanitary and tannery workers are significant
among those included in the marginalized groups.

Five countries in the world are identified as those
having marginalized people in greater proportion.
They are : Pakistan, India, Srilanka, lraq and
Bangaladesh.

7:14:1 Meaning of ‘Marginalized
Social Group’

In a society, excluding one or more groups of
people who are perceived by the dominant sociai
groups as ‘not so important’, ‘powerless’ or ‘without
useful function’, from the main stream of the society
and making them accept their inferiority is called
marginalization.

In Western countries senile and very old people

too are also marginalized.

Generally, in society those who are perceived
as ‘undesirable’ or ‘useless’ by the dominant social
groups are marginalized. Such exclusion is inhuman

nal Opportunities
of Educatlo 30
of Equality 3
ations {

Implic

: further comments. Those who arg
s no main stream of the society, form
me ct groups from among themselves
protect themselves ang
nd collective identity.

and need
excluded from t
separate and distin
and act unitedly to
establishing their unity 2

Peter Leonard defines, “Marginality as being

main stream of productive activity”.

outside the ‘

ization means keeping some socia|
Lage: denying them the specia)
und at the centre.

Marginal
groups at the
privileges and power fo

Marginality is so thoroughly demeaning, for
economic wellbeing, human dignity as well as for
physical security. Marginal people can always be
identified by Ne members of the dominant

community society and will face irrevocable

discrimination”. I .
7:11:2 Characteristics of Marginalized
Social Groups

The following are the characteristics of the

marginalized social groups.

i) Marginalized social groups are subjected to
social differentiation by the people of the
majority group in the society and are expected
to obey others.

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 158
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 158
304

Contemporary India and Education

—

ii) As the physical activities and cultural behaviour

. ili)

avi)

7:11:3

of the people of the marginalized groups quite
differ from the habits and life style of the majority
people in the society belonging to the dominant
social groups, they do not get social ranognition.

People of such ‘minority groups develop a kind

of unity and collective identity among

themselves, and act as a group to face the

common challenges collectively.

The people of these marginalized groups, have
the norms to define who are all included in their
group.

They show interest to marry only those in their

respective groups. |

Dwellings of the marginalized people are
generally located at the outskirts of villages and
towns and remain highly unhygienic, without
any basic amenities.

Marginalized People in India

(i) Women, (ii) Differently abled (the disabled),

iii) Dalits (Scheduled Castes), (iv) Scheduled Tribes
Adivasis), (v) Old people, (vi) Orphan children,
vii) Transgender / bisexual, (viii) Lepers (ix) Beggars.

7:11:4

o of Equality of Educational Opportunities 205

Education of the Dalits

Before Indian independence, Dalits were
considered as untouchables and pushed to the
margin of the society and made to live in unhygienic
slums, usually located at the outskirts of villages. The
Marathi word ‘Dalit’ means the ‘suppressed’ or
‘oppressed’.

According to the Census (2011), Dalit Population
in India is about 20.14 crores. It constitutes 16.6%
of India’s population.
7:11:4:01 Educational Facilities
Provided to the Dalits

4 Free education at all levels

4 Free residential hostels, separately for dalit
boys and girls

4 In rural areas, separate schools for the Dalits,
in which students are provided free textbooks,
stationery, uniforms and midday meals.

4 Reservation of seats in higher education

4 Award of prizes and certificates for those with
good educational proficiency

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 159
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 159
306 Contemporary Indla and Educatlon

Most of the Adivasis inhabit in the North Eas
India. Adivasis constitute 87.7% of the population of
Nagaland, 85.5% in Megalaya, 94.7% in Mizoram,
68.7% in Arunachal Pradesh and 1% Only in
Tamilnadu. .

According to the Census of 2011, literacy rate
among the Scheduled Castes is 66.07% and. 58.96%
among the Scheduled Tribes. Literacy rate among
the Scheduled Tribes in Tamilnadu is 54.3%.

[Nagaland in North East India, has a literacy rate
of 80.11% (Male 83.29%, Female 76.69). It has
adopted English as the official language in 1967. It
has an area of 16,579 K.M. anda population of 22.75
lakhs (in 2012)]

Among the Scheduled Tribes, Schoo! drop out
rate was found to be high.

Statistical Data of School Drop-out Rate (in %)

Males Females

37.2 33.9
54.7 55.4
70.6 71.3

Std. | to V
Std. | to VIII
Std. | to X

ortunities” 307

ft onal Opp
i . of Equallty oO Educatl
ation:

Implic

7-11.5:01 Problems in the Education of
the Tribals

- Tribals have only spoken

+ Language language; they do not have
scripts grammar or literature.
- i and selling
. ; Hunting - gathering and sell
+ Life Style .

| herbal leaves and roots, honey
- cutting trees - helping

mountaineers.’

: They live in-hamlets which’are
widely scattered; density of
population is very less.

+ Forest Area.

- The instruction provided in
| gchool, in their opinion, is not
useful for the day-to-day life;
lack of trained tribal teachers - -
‘Fear that learning through

other languages will upset their
i 7 way of life - they prefer their
| - isolation in the forests with their
( own music and dance -
a . Unwilling to change their life

+ Problems in the
Education of
Tribals. i

' style.

Cl-21

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 160
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 160
308

Contemporary India and Education

i EE
7:11:5:02 Ways and Means of Providing

Ts

Education for sil Scheduled
Tribes .
Establishing residential schools in the hilly areas
of the tribal “people. ;
Developing access paths and roads to reach the

nearby schools in the urban areas.

To reduce the drop out rate at school education
| ‘

level, establishing Vocational Training Centres

which imparts literacy along with vocational

training.
Liberal financial aid to students in the form of
scholarships.

Provision for special reservation for tribal
students in educational institutions.

Bringing all tribal schools under the Sarva Siksha
Abhiyan (S.S.A.) Scheme.

Giving special allowance to teachers working in
Tribal schools.

Giving short term training in teaching, to tribal

youths and involving them in tiny villages to teach
children on a contract basis.

quality of Educational Opportunities 309

ed Tribal Welfare Board,

9. Through Integrat
dertaken.

the following activities may be un

i) Developing awareness among the tribals

about the need for education of children.

ii) Providing functional literacy related to
agriculture, horticulture, marketing the
medicinal herbs, honey and aromatic
materials that are collected.

7:11:6 Education of Women

There is a remarkable progress in the education
of women in Kerala and Mizoram, which have
attained 100% literacy among the females.

In the State of Rajasthan, percentage of literacy
rate among the females is the lowest in India (only
52.12%). i ‘

Over all percentage of literacy in India is 81.3
for men and 65.4 for women.

In Tamilnadu average literacy rate is 80.33%; for
men it is 86.81% and for women 73.86%.

7:11:6:01 Measures for Improving
Women’s Education
i) Giving priority to open girls’ schools and hostels
for girls.

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 161
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 161
310 Contemporary India and Education

rr Implications of Equality of Educational Opportunities 311

ce
| through Indira Gandhi National Open University
IGNOU) and Distant education programmes of the

State Universities.

ii) Giving free bus passes to girls to go to schools
and colleges. In urban areas, running speci
buses for women, on school and college
working days.

General Measures

4 Providing housing facilities on nominal rent for
women teachets near their school area, where

iii) Providing free education and text books upto
XII Std.

iv) Providing free cycle, lap-top, school uniform and
medical advice for girls studying in the higher
secondary:classes.

they work.

4 Special awards and rewards to’ teachers who

Vv) Appointing women teachers in large numbers take special interest and care in girls’ education.

and deploying only women teachers in girls’
schools as far as possible.

4 Allowing teachers to work on part-time basis.

A Providing financial assistance for education to
young widows and women who have been
deserted by'their husbands.

|

Conclusion:
‘

vi) Improving the basic amenities needed for
students in schools and colleges.

vil) Preventing sexual harassment of girls in
educational institutions.

In this Unit, Meaning of Equality in Educational
Opportunity, Provisions related to Equality in the
Indian Constitution, Causes of Inequality in
Education, Ways and Means of providing Equal
Opportunities in Education, Inequality and causes
for it, Inequality. in Education and Two Basic Causes
for it viz. (i) Discriminating the social groups and
(ii) Marginalization of some social groups,

Part time Education

Through the open school system, helping girls
to pass the VIII, X and XII Std. examinations and
improve their educational qualifications.

Higher Education

Helping women to get degrees and diplomas.

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 162
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 162
312 Contemporary Indla and Education

Characteristics of marginalized graups, Characteristics
of marginalized children, Important types of social
inequality - (i) Caste-based social inequality (ji) Class-
based social inequality (iii) Gender related social
inequality and (iv) Region- -related social inéqualities,
Education for eliminating social inequality, Education
for the marginalized, particularly education for the
Dalits, Education for the tribals and Education for

1

’ womenwere discussed in details.

i

Review Questions:

1. What is meant by “Equal Opportunity
Education? (C) [Ans: 7:01]

2. Explain the Constitutional Provisions related to
Equality. (B) [Ans: 7:02)

3. Mention the causes for inequalities in
educational opportunities and the ways and
means of providing equal. opportunities in
Education. (A) [Ans: 7:03 + 7:04]

4. Write a-short note on the “Equality in
Educational Opportunities in Tamil Nadu (C)
[Ans:7:04:1]

10.

al Opportunities 313

Implications of Equality of Education

implication ee

What is meant by ‘Inequality’? Mention the
causes for it. (B) [Ans: 7:05]

Give the meaning and definition of ‘Social Inequality’.
(C) [Ans: 7:06:1]

What is meant by ‘Social Inequality”? Discuss
the causes for social inequality. (A) [Ans: 7:06:1
+ 7:06:2]

What do you understand by Inequality in! Education?
(C) [Ans: 7:07]

What is meant by Inequality in Education?
Explain the two basic factors involved in it. (A)
[Ans: 7:07 + 7:08 + 7:08:1 + 7:08:2 + 7:08:2:01
+ 7:08:2:02]

What is meant by ‘Social Inequality’? Explain
briefly the different types of it. (A) [Ans: 7:06:1
+ 7:09 + 7:09:1 to the end of first paragraph in
7:09:4]

Write a short note on the following :

i) Caste-based_ social inequality. (C)
[Ans:7:09:1]
ii) Class-based social inequality. (B)

[Ans:7:09:3]

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 163
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 163
TEACHER EDUCATION UNIVERITy
U

Chennai

314 Contemporary India and Education

ss

ili) Gender related social inequality. (B):
[Ans:7:09:2]

iv) Region-based social inequality. (C) [Ans: In
7:09:4, first paragraph only]

TAMIL NAD

{
|
12. Explain the region-based social inequality, with |
statistical evidences related to important indices |

of progress. (A) [Ans: Whole of 7:09:4]
13. What is meant by ‘social inequality’? Explain
the ways and means of removing it through

education. (A) [Ans: 7:06:1 + 7:10]

CONTEMPORARY INDIA
AND EDUCATION

(Model Question Papers based on the revised

14. What do you mean by ‘Marginalized Social Group’? . P
syllabus of 2021 with answers cited in the book) .

(C) [Ans: 7:11:1 ]
15. Write a note on the following :
i) Education of the Dalits. (C) [Ans: 7:11:4 4
7:11:4:01]
ii) Problems in the education of the tribals. (C)
[Ans: 7:11:5:01]
iii) Education of the Tribals (C) [Ans: 7:11:5:02]
iv) Women’s education. (B) [Ans: 7:11:6 +
7:11:6:01]
16. Discuss the ways and means of Providing
‘education of the marginalized’. (A) [Ans :7:11:1°
+ 7:11:34 7:11:14 4 7:311:4 -01 + 7:11:55 +
7:14:5:01 + 7:11:5:02 +7:11-6 + 7:11:6:01]

SRIRAM PUBLISHERS

(Solai K.S. A/C Mini Hall Ground Floor)

33/5, Dr.RadhakrishnanSalai, Alwarthirunagar,
Valasaravakkam, Chennai — 600 087.

Phone: (044) 4867 7383. Mobile: 98401 58595

(i)

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 164
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 164
MODEL QUESTION PAPER — |
Maximum Marks: 70

Time: 3 Hours
(5x1=5)

PART-A ' “(Objective Type Questions)
(Answer the following Objective Type Questions by selecting

the most correct answer among the alternatives given. Each
correct answer carries 1 mark) ‘

“providing Equal. opportunity in Education” refers to

“es
(i) Providing same kind of education for all’
(ii) Providing education according to one’s ab ity
(iii) Providing opportunity for all to get education to suit
(iv) Providing opportunity to get education without any
discrimination based on one’s caste, religion, race,
social and economic status. [Ans:(iv)]
2. Education was transferred from State List to Concurrent -

List in the year
(i) 1968 (ii) 1991
3. “Diversity in Education”
(i) Arises out of individual differences
(ii) Arises out of individual and social level differences
among people living in a society with a culture of its

(iii) 1976 (iv) 4971 [Ans: (iii)]

own

(iii) Arises out of differences inj caste, religion, race,
language etc. prevailing in the society

(iv) Arises out of differences who live in different countries
(Ans: (ii)]

4. “Education for All” refers to

(i) Both normal children and children with special needs
studying together in the age appropriate classes

(ii) Providing compulsory education to all children in the
age group of 6to 14

(ii)

PART —B Short Answer Type

i) Establishing special schools for children with special
needs as schools are arranged for normal children to

get education
(iv): Making both children with special needs as well as
those with disabilities study in the same common

school campus. [Ans: (i)]
Three language formula was conceived by
National Council for Research and Training (NCERT)
Central Academic Board of Education (CABE)

Secondary Education Commission
(iv) Kothari Education Commission

Ans: (ii)]
(3x5 = 15)

(Answer any 3 of the following, each in about 2 1/2 pages.

6.

10.

PART —C

Each question carries 5 marks)
Explain the nature of education as a separate discipl
[Ans: 1:07:2]
Define social diversity. Describe the social diversity
prevalent in India. [Ans: 4:01:2 + 4:03]
Explain briefly the aims and functions of
SarvaSikshaAbhiyan Scheme. [Ans:5:02 + 5:02:1 +
5:02:1:01 + 5:02:2]
Compare and contrast the views of Rabindranath Tagore,
Gandhiji and Vivekananda on the issue of medium of
instruction. [Ans:6:10]

Explain the concepts of discriminating social groups and
marginalization, the factors which are the causes of

inequality in education. [Ans: 7:08:1 + 7:08:2]
.(5 x10 = 50)

ine

(Essay Type)

(Answer the following 5 questions, each in about 5 pages.

11;

Each question carries 10 marks)

What is meant by ‘Social Justice’? Justify the
statement that “Education is the means of achieving
social justice. [Ans: 3:06:1 + 3:06:2] OR

a)

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 165
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 165
12.

AS.

14,

15.

b) Explain the transfer of education to the Concurrent
List and its educational implicatins. [Ans: 3:09 +
3:09:1]

a) Explain the role of education in creating positive
attitude in students towards social diversity,

[Ans: 4:06] OR

b) Briefly explain the inter-disciplinary nature of

education with Philosophy, Psychology and sociology.
fAns: 4:07:1:02+ 4:07:1:03 + 4:07:1:04]

a) Compare and contrast “Education for All’ and
“Inclusive Education”. (Ans: 5:06:1 + 5:06:3 + 5:06:4]
OR

b) Briefly explain the challenges in achieving universal
‘< Primary education and the efforts taken to provide
universal primary education [Ans: 5:01:2 + 5:01:3]

a) Explain the efforts taken to resolve the language issue
in post-independent India. (Ans: 6:02:1 + 6:02:2 +
* 6:02:3 + 6:02:4 + 6:02:5 + 6:02:5:01] OR

b) Explain the language policy mentioned in the Indian
Constitution. [Ans: 6:04 + 6:04:1 to the end of 6:04:9]

a) What is meant by “Social Inequality’? Explain the ways
of means of eradicating social inequality through

. @ducation. [Ans: 7:06:1 + 7:10] OR

b) Examine the ways and means of providing education
to the marginalized. [Ans: 7:11:1 + 7:11:3+ 7:11:4 +
7:11:4:01 + 7:11:5 + 7:11:05:1 + 7:11;5:02 + 7:11:6 +

7:11:6:01) .

(iv)

Time: 3 Hours
PART—A

(Answer the follow!
the most correct an

de

QUESTION PAPER — 1) a!

Maximum Marks: *
e Type Questions)

MODEL

(Objectiv (Sxas 5)
tions by sel

pjective Type Ques lectin

ne o paaiinahs the alternatives given, Ben

rrect answer carries 1 mark)
co

” cted in the year
ion Act” was ena r
“Right ts ny 200d (iii) 2010 (iv) 2005 [Ans: (ii)}
i
) ducation, Psychology guides to determine which of the
ne A
following element
(i) What to teach
) How to teach "
hich of the following is not identified as a pilla, *
saa in Detor’s Commission Report.

(ii) Why to teach
(iv) When to teach- [Ans: (iii)

(i) Learning to know
(ii) Learning to do

(i ) Learning to be —
(iv) Learning to respect social diversity —_[Ans: (iv)}
The Indian thinker who opposed the inclusion of English in
the school curriculum

(i) Vivekanandar (ii)
(iii) Rabindranath Tagore (iv) i)
Those not included in the “Marginalised Social Group” are
(i) Scheduled Tribes

(ii) Nomads

(iii) Scheduled Castes

(iv) Most Backward Class

, Gandhiji
Arabindo [Ans:

[Ans: (iv)]

(v)

──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 166
──────────────────────────────────────────────────
PAGE 166
Short Answer Type (3x5 = 15)
3 of the following, each In about 2 1/2 pages.

Each question carries 5 marks)
6. Explain the meaning and objectives of “Secondary
Education”. [Ans: 2:04:1 + 2:04:3)]

7, Explain the role of education in creating positive attitude
in students towards social diversity. Ans: 4:06]

PART - 8
(Answer any

8. Explain the.c
strategies of implementing it. [Ans:

9. Explain the modified three language formula of Kothari
Education Commission and the ways recommended to

implement it. [Ans: 6:02:5 + 6:02:5:02]
Explain the Constitutional provisions related to! “Equality”.
[Ans: 7:02] : . 4 ;

5:05 +5:05:1 + 5:05:2)

10.

PART — C (Essay Type) (5 x10 = 50)
(Answer the following 5 questions, each in about 5 pages.

Each question carries 10 marks)

Explain the “Right to Education Act” and its salient
features. [Ans: 3:07:1 + 3:97:2] . OR
Briefly explain the various levels of education
prevalent in India. [Ans: 2:01 t 2:02 + 2:02:1 + 2:02:3
+ 2:03:1 + 2:04:1 + 2:0-5:1 + 2:06:1 + 2:07:1 + 2:08:1
+ 2:09:1 + 1:08:1 + 1:08:2 + 1108:3]

Explain the salient features of ‘Education for Under-
standing Social Diversity of India. | [Ans:4:05] OR
b) Explain the various levels of social diversity prevailing
in India. [Ans: 4:04 + 4:04:1 tg the end of 4:04:6]
Examine the Four Pillars of Education as described in
Delor’s Commission Report. [Ans: 5:08 + 5:08:1 to

the end of 5:08:4] i OR

11. a)

b)

12 a)

13. a)

(vi)

e. concept of integrated education and the -

b)
14, a)
b)
15. a)
b)

Explain the challenges in achieving universal primary
education and the efforts taken to provide universal

primary education (Ans: 5:01:2 + 5:01:3])
Critically examine the National Language Policy.
[Ans: 6:08]

Explain the efforts taken to resolve the language issue
in the post-independent India. [Ans: 6:02:1 to the
end of 6:02:5 + 6:02:5:01 + 6:02:05:02]

What is meant by “Social Inequality”? Briefly explain
its different types.(Ans: 7:06:1 + 7:09 + 7:09:1 to the
end of first paragraph of 7:09:4) OR
Mention the causes for inequalities in educational

e OPportunities and the ways and means of providing
equal opportunity in education. [Ans:7:03 +7:04]

OR

(vii)
